“And be bawled at by duffers? No fear!” said I. “Leave that to the
plough-boys.”

“But an officer?”

“I don’t know,” I said, evading a shameful difficulty.

“I’d rather go into the navy.”

“Wouldn’t you like to fight?”

“I’d like to fight,” I said. “But a common soldier it’s no honour to
have to be told to fight and to be looked down upon while you do it,
and how could I be an officer?”

“Couldn’t you be?” she said, and looked at me doubtfully; and the
spaces of the social system opened between us.

Then, as became a male of spirit, I took upon myself to brag and lie my
way through this trouble. I said I was a poor man, and poor men went
into the navy; that I “knew” mathematics, which no army officer did;
and I claimed Nelson for an exemplar, and spoke very highly of my
outlook upon blue water. “He loved Lady Hamilton,” I said, “although
she _was_ a lady—and I will love you.”

We were somewhere near that when the egregious governess became
audible, calling “Beeee-âtrice! Beeee-e-âtrice!”

“Snifty beast!” said my lady, and tried to get on with the
conversation; but that governess made things impossible.

“Come here!” said my lady suddenly, holding out a grubby hand; and I
went very close to her, and she put her little head down upon the wall
until her black fog of hair tickled my cheek.

“You are my humble, faithful lover,” she demanded in a whisper, her
warm flushed face near touching mine, and her eyes very dark and
lustrous.

“I am your humble, faithful lover,” I whispered back.

And she put her arm about my head and put out her lips and we kissed,
and boy though I was, I was all atremble. So we two kissed for the
first time.

“_Beeee-e-e_-â-trice!” fearfully close.

My lady had vanished, with one wild kick of her black-stocking leg. A
moment after, I heard her sustaining the reproaches of her governess,
and explaining her failure to answer with an admirable lucidity and
disingenuousness.

I felt it was unnecessary for me to be seen just then, and I vanished
guiltily round the corner into the West Wood, and so to love-dreams and
single-handed play, wandering along one of those meandering bracken
valleys that varied Bladesover park. And that day and for many days
that kiss upon my lips was a seal, and by night the seed of dreams.

Then I remember an expedition we made—she, I, and her half-brother—into
those West Woods—they two were supposed to be playing in the
shrubbery—and how we were Indians there, and made a wigwam out of a
pile of beech logs, and how we stalked deer, crept near and watched
rabbits feeding in a glade, and almost got a squirrel. It was play
seasoned with plentiful disputing between me and young Garvell, for
each firmly insisted upon the leading _rôles_, and only my wider
reading—I had read ten stories to his one—gave me the ascendency over
him. Also I scored over him by knowing how to find the eagle in a
bracken stem. And somehow—I don’t remember what led to it at all—I and
Beatrice, two hot and ruffled creatures, crept in among the tall
bracken and hid from him. The great fronds rose above us, five feet or
more, and as I had learnt how to wriggle through that undergrowth with
the minimum of betrayal by tossing greenery above, I led the way. The
ground under bracken is beautifully clear and faintly scented in warm
weather; the stems come up black and then green; if you crawl flat, it
is a tropical forest in miniature. I led the way and Beatrice crawled
behind, and then as the green of the further glade opened before us,
stopped. She crawled up to me, her hot little face came close to mine;
once more she looked and breathed close to me, and suddenly she flung
her arm about my neck and dragged me to earth beside her, and kissed me
and kissed me again. We kissed, we embraced and kissed again, all
without a word; we desisted, we stared and hesitated—then in a suddenly
damped mood and a little perplexed at ourselves, crawled out, to be
presently run down and caught in the tamest way by Archie.

That comes back very clearly to me, and other vague memories—I know old
Hall and his gun, out shooting at jackdaws, came into our common
experiences, but I don’t remember how; and then at last, abruptly, our
fight in the Warren stands out. The Warren, like most places in England
that have that name, was not particularly a warren, it was a long slope
of thorns and beeches through which a path ran, and made an alternative
route to the downhill carriage road between Bladesover and Ropedean. I
don’t know how we three got there, but I have an uncertain fancy it was
connected with a visit paid by the governess to the Ropedean vicarage
people. But suddenly Archie and I, in discussing a game, fell into a
dispute for Beatrice. I had made him the fairest offer: I was to be a
Spanish nobleman, she was to be my wife, and he was to be a tribe of
Indians trying to carry her off. It seems to me a fairly attractive
offer to a boy to be a whole tribe of Indians with a chance of such a
booty. But Archie suddenly took offence.

“No,” he said; “we can’t have that!”

“Can’t have what?”

“You can’t be a gentleman, because you aren’t. And you can’t play
Beatrice is your wife. It’s—it’s impertinent.”

“But” I said, and looked at her.

Some earlier grudge in the day’s affairs must have been in Archie’s
mind. “We let you play with us,” said Archie; “but we can’t have things
like that.”

“What rot!” said Beatrice. “He can if he likes.”

But he carried his point. I let him carry it, and only began to grow
angry three or four minutes later. Then we were still discussing play
and disputing about another game. Nothing seemed right for all of us.

“We don’t want you to play with us at all,” said Archie.

“Yes, we do,” said Beatrice.

“He drops his aitches like anything.”

“No, ’e doesn’t,” said I, in the heat of the moment.

“There you go!” he cried. “E, he says. E! E! E!”

He pointed a finger at me. He had struck to the heart of my shame. I
made the only possible reply by a rush at him. “Hello!” he cried, at my
blackavised attack. He dropped back into an attitude that had some
style in it, parried my blow, got back at my cheek, and laughed with
surprise and relief at his own success. Whereupon I became a thing of
murderous rage. He could box as well or better than I—he had yet to
realise I knew anything of that at all—but I had fought once or twice
to a finish with bare fists. I was used to inflicting and enduring
savage hurting, and I doubt if he had ever fought. I hadn’t fought ten
seconds before I felt this softness in him, realised all that quality
of modern upper-class England that never goes to the quick, that hedges
about rules and those petty points of honour that are the ultimate
comminution of honour, that claims credit for things demonstrably half
done. He seemed to think that first hit of his and one or two others
were going to matter, that I ought to give in when presently my lip
bled and dripped blood upon my clothes. So before we had been at it a
minute he had ceased to be aggressive except in momentary spurts, and I
was knocking him about almost as I wanted to do; and demanding
breathlessly and fiercely, after our school manner, whether he had had
enough, not knowing that by his high code and his soft training it was
equally impossible for him to either buck-up and beat me, or give in.

I have a very distinct impression of Beatrice dancing about us during
the affair in a state of unladylike appreciation, but I was too
preoccupied to hear much of what she was saying. But she certainly
backed us both, and I am inclined to think now—it may be the
disillusionment of my ripened years—whichever she thought was winning.

Then young Garvell, giving way before my slogging, stumbled and fell
over a big flint, and I, still following the tradition of my class and
school, promptly flung myself on him to finish him. We were busy with
each other on the ground when we became aware of a dreadful
interruption.

“Shut up, you _fool!_” said Archie.

“Oh, Lady Drew!” I heard Beatrice cry. “They’re fighting! They’re
fighting something awful!”

I looked over my shoulder. Archie’s wish to get up became irresistible,
and my resolve to go on with him vanished altogether.

I became aware of the two old ladies, presences of black and purple
silk and fur and shining dark things; they had walked up through the
Warren, while the horses took the hill easily, and so had come upon us.
Beatrice had gone to them at once with an air of taking refuge, and
stood beside and a little behind them. We both rose dejectedly. The two
old ladies were evidently quite dreadfully shocked, and peering at us
with their poor old eyes; and never had I seen such a tremblement in
Lady Drew’s lorgnettes.

“You’ve never been fighting?” said Lady Drew.

“You have been fighting.”

“It wasn’t proper fighting,” snapped Archie, with accusing eyes on me.

“It’s Mrs. Ponderevo’s George!” said Miss Somerville, so adding a
conviction for ingratitude to my evident sacrilege.

“How could he _dare?_” cried Lady Drew, becoming very awful.

“He broke the rules” said Archie, sobbing for breath. “I slipped,
and—he hit me while I was down. He knelt on me.”

“How could you _dare?_” said Lady Drew.

I produced an experienced handkerchief rolled up into a tight ball, and
wiped the blood from my chin, but I offered no explanation of my
daring. Among other things that prevented that, I was too short of
breath.

“He didn’t fight fair,” sobbed Archie.

Beatrice, from behind the old ladies, regarded me intently and without
hostility. I am inclined to think the modification of my face through
the damage to my lip interested her. It became dimly apparent to my
confused intelligence that I must not say these two had been playing
with me. That would not be after the rules of their game. I resolved in
this difficult situation upon a sulky silence, and to take whatever
consequences might follow.

IX

The powers of justice in Bladesover made an extraordinary mess of my
case.

I have regretfully to admit that the Honourable Beatrice Normandy did,
at the age of ten, betray me, abandon me, and lie most abominably about
me. She was, as a matter of fact, panic-stricken about me, conscience
stricken too; she bolted from the very thought of my being her
affianced lover and so forth, from the faintest memory of kissing; she
was indeed altogether disgraceful and human in her betrayal. She and
her half-brother lied in perfect concord, and I was presented as a
wanton assailant of my social betters. They were waiting about in the
Warren, when I came up and spoke to them, etc.

On the whole, I now perceive Lady Drew’s decisions were, in the light
of the evidence, reasonable and merciful.

They were conveyed to me by my mother, who was, I really believe, even
more shocked by the grossness of my social insubordination than Lady
Drew. She dilated on her ladyship’s kindnesses to me, on the effrontery
and wickedness of my procedure, and so came at last to the terms of my
penance. “You must go up to young Mr. Garvell, and beg his pardon.”

“I won’t beg his pardon,” I said, speaking for the first time.

My mother paused, incredulous.

I folded my arms on her table-cloth, and delivered my wicked little
ultimatum. “I won’t beg his pardon nohow,” I said. “See?”

“Then you will have to go off to your uncle Frapp at Chatham.”

“I don’t care where I have to go or what I have to do, I won’t beg his
pardon,” I said.

And I didn’t.

After that I was one against the world. Perhaps in my mother’s heart
there lurked some pity for me, but she did not show it. She took the
side of the young gentleman; she tried hard, she tried very hard, to
make me say I was sorry I had struck him. Sorry!

I couldn’t explain.

So I went into exile in the dog-cart to Redwood station, with Jukes the
coachman, coldly silent, driving me, and all my personal belongings in
a small American cloth portmanteau behind.

I felt I had much to embitter me; the game had and the beginnings of
fairness by any standards I knew.... But the thing that embittered me
most was that the Honourable Beatrice Normandy should have repudiated
and fled from me as though I was some sort of leper, and not even have
taken a chance or so, to give me a good-bye. She might have done that
anyhow! Supposing I had told on her! But the son of a servant counts as
a servant. She had forgotten and now remembered.

I solaced myself with some extraordinary dream of coming back to
Bladesover, stern, powerful, after the fashion of Coriolanus. I do not
recall the details, but I have no doubt I displayed great
magnanimity...

Well, anyhow I never said I was sorry for pounding young Garvell, and I
am not sorry to this day.




CHAPTER THE SECOND
OF MY LAUNCH INTO THE WORLD AND THE LAST I SAW OF BLADESOVER


I

When I was thus banished from Bladesover House, as it was then thought
for good and all, I was sent by my mother in a vindictive spirit, first
to her cousin Nicodemus Frapp, and then, as a fully indentured
apprentice, to my uncle Ponderevo.

I ran away from the care of my cousin Nicodemus back to Bladesover
House.

My cousin Nicodemus Frapp was a baker in a back street—a slum
rather—just off that miserable narrow mean high road that threads those
exquisite beads, Rochester and Chatham. He was, I must admit, a shock
to me, much dominated by a young, plump, prolific, malingering wife; a
bent, slow-moving, unwilling dark man with flour in his hair and
eyelashes, in the lines of his face and the seams of his coat. I’ve
never had a chance to correct my early impression of him, and he still
remains an almost dreadful memory, a sort of caricature of incompetent
simplicity. As I remember him, indeed, he presented the servile
tradition perfected. He had no pride in his person; fine clothes and
dressing up wasn’t “for the likes of” him, so that he got his wife, who
was no artist at it, to cut his black hair at irregular intervals, and
let his nails become disagreeable to the fastidious eye; he had no
pride in his business nor any initiative; his only virtues were not
doing certain things and hard work. “Your uncle,” said my mother—all
grown-up cousins were uncles by courtesy among the Victorian
middle-class—“isn’t much to look at or talk to, but he’s a Good
Hard-Working Man.” There was a sort of base honourableness about toil,
however needless, in that system of inversion. Another point of honour
was to rise at or before dawn, and then laboriously muddle about.

It was very distinctly impressed on my mind that the Good Hard-Working
Man would have thought it “fal-lallish” to own a pocket handkerchief.
Poor old Frapp—dirty and crushed by, product of, Bladesover’s
magnificence! He made no fight against the world at all, he was
floundering in small debts that were not so small but that finally they
overwhelmed him, whenever there was occasion for any exertion his wife
fell back upon pains and her “condition,” and God sent them many
children, most of whom died, and so, by their coming and going, gave a
double exercise in the virtues of submission.

Resignation to God’s will was the common device of these people in the
face of every duty and every emergency. There were no books in the
house; I doubt if either of them had retained the capacity for reading
consecutively for more than a minute or so, and it was with amazement
that day after day, over and above stale bread, one beheld food and
again more food amidst the litter that held permanent session on the
living-room table.

One might have doubted if either of them felt discomfort in this dusty
darkness of existence, if it was not that they did visibly seek
consolation. They sought this and found it of a Sunday, not in strong
drink and raving, but in imaginary draughts of blood. They met with
twenty or thirty other darkened and unclean people, all dressed in
dingy colours that would not show the dirt, in a little brick-built
chapel equipped with a spavined roarer of a harmonium, and there
solaced their minds on the thought that all that was fair and free in
life, all that struggled, all that planned and made, all pride and
beauty and honour, all fine and enjoyable things, were irrevocably
damned to everlasting torments. They were the self-appointed confidants
of God’s mockery of his own creation. So at any rate they stick in my
mind. Vaguer, and yet hardly less agreeable than this cosmic jest, this
coming “Yah, clever!” and general serving out and “showing up” of the
lucky, the bold, and the cheerful, was their own predestination to
Glory.

“There is a Fountain, filled with Blood
Drawn from Emmanuel’s Veins,”


so they sang. I hear the drone and wheeze of that hymn now. I hated
them with the bitter uncharitable condemnation of boyhood, and a twinge
of that hate comes back to me. As I write the words, the sounds and
then the scene return, these obscure, undignified people, a fat woman
with asthma, an old Welsh milk-seller with a tumour on his bald head,
who was the intellectual leader of the sect, a huge-voiced haberdasher
with a big black beard, a white-faced, extraordinarily pregnant woman,
his wife, a spectacled rate collector with a bent back.... I hear the
talk about souls, the strange battered old phrases that were coined
ages ago in the seaports of the sun-dry Levant, of balm of Gilead and
manna in the desert, of gourds that give shade and water in a thirsty
land; I recall again the way in which at the conclusion of the service
the talk remained pious in form but became medical in substance, and
how the women got together for obstetric whisperings. I, as a boy, did
not matter, and might overhear.

If Bladesover is my key for the explanation of England, I think my
invincible persuasion that I understand Russia was engendered by the
circle of Uncle Frapp.

I slept in a dingy sheeted bed with the two elder survivors of Frapp
fecundity, and spent my week days in helping in the laborious disorder
of the shop and bakehouse, in incidental deliveries of bread and so
forth, and in parrying the probings of my uncle into my relations with
the Blood, and his confidential explanations that ten shillings a
week—which was what my mother paid him—was not enough to cover my
accommodation. He was very anxious to keep that, but also he wanted
more. There were neither books nor any seat nor corner in that house
where reading was possible, no newspaper ever brought the clash of
worldly things into its heavenward seclusion; horror of it all grew in
me daily, and whenever I could I escaped into the streets and tramped
about Chatham. The news shops appealed to me particularly. One saw
there smudgy illustrated sheets, the _Police News_ in particular, in
which vilely drawn pictures brought home to the dullest intelligence an
interminable succession of squalid crimes, women murdered and put into
boxes, buried under floors, old men bludgeoned at midnight by robbers,
people thrust suddenly out of trains, happy lovers shot, vitrioled and
so forth by rivals. I got my first glimpse of the life of pleasure in
foully drawn pictures of “police raids” on this and that. Interspersed
with these sheets were others in which Sloper, the urban John Bull, had
his fling with gin bottle and obese umbrella, or the kindly empty faces
of the Royal Family appeared and reappeared, visiting this, opening
that, getting married, getting offspring, lying in state, doing
everything but anything, a wonderful, good-meaning, impenetrable race
apart.

I have never revisited Chatham; the impression it has left on my mind
is one of squalid compression, unlit by any gleam of a maturer charity.
All its effects arranged themselves as antithetical to the Bladesover
effects. They confirmed and intensified all that Bladesover suggested.
Bladesover declared itself to be the land, to be essentially England; I
have already told how its airy spaciousness, its wide dignity, seemed
to thrust village, church, and vicarage into corners, into a secondary
and conditional significance. Here one gathered the corollary of that.
Since the whole wide country of Kent was made up of contiguous
Bladesovers and for the gentlefolk, the surplus of population, all who
were not good tenants nor good labourers, Church of England, submissive
and respectful, were necessarily thrust together, jostled out of sight,
to fester as they might in this place that had the colours and even the
smells of a well-packed dustbin. They should be grateful even for that;
that, one felt, was the theory of it all.

And I loafed about this wilderness of crowded dinginess, with young,
receptive, wide-open eyes, and through the blessing (or curse) of some
fairy godmother of mine, asking and asking again: “But after all,
_why_—”

I wandered up through Rochester once, and had a glimpse of the Stour
valley above the town, all horrible with cement works and foully
smoking chimneys and rows of workmen’s cottages, minute, ugly,
uncomfortable, and grimy. So I had my first intimation of how
industrialism must live in a landlord’s land. I spent some hours, too,
in the streets that give upon the river, drawn by the spell of the sea.
But I saw barges and ships stripped of magic and mostly devoted to
cement, ice, timber, and coal. The sailors looked to me gross and
slovenly men, and the shipping struck me as clumsy, ugly, old, and
dirty. I discovered that most sails don’t fit the ships that hoist
them, and that there may be as pitiful and squalid a display of poverty
with a vessel as with a man. When I saw colliers unloading, watched the
workers in the hold filling up silly little sacks and the succession of
blackened, half-naked men that ran to and fro with these along a plank
over a thirty-foot drop into filth and mud, I was first seized with
admiration of their courage and toughness and then, “But after all,
_why_—?” and the stupid ugliness of all this waste of muscle and
endurance came home to me. Among other things it obviously wasted and
deteriorated the coal.... And I had imagined great things of the sea!

Well, anyhow, for a time that vocation was stilled.

But such impressions came into my leisure, and of that I had no excess.
Most of my time was spent doing things for Uncle Frapp, and my evenings
and nights perforce in the company of the two eldest of my cousins. He
was errand boy at an oil shop and fervently pious, and of him I saw
nothing until the evening except at meals; the other was enjoying the
midsummer holidays without any great elation; a singularly thin and
abject, stunted creature he was, whose chief liveliness was to pretend
to be a monkey, and who I am now convinced had some secret disease that
drained his vitality away. If I met him now I should think him a
pitiful little creature and be extremely sorry for him. Then I felt
only a wondering aversion. He sniffed horribly, he was tired out by a
couple of miles of loafing, he never started any conversation, and he
seemed to prefer his own company to mine. His mother, poor woman, said
he was the “thoughtful one.”

Serious trouble came suddenly out of a conversation we held in bed one
night. Some particularly pious phrase of my elder cousin’s irritated me
extremely, and I avowed outright my entire disbelief in the whole
scheme of revealed religion. I had never said a word about my doubts to
any one before, except to Ewart who had first evolved them. I had never
settled my doubts until at this moment when I spoke. But it came to me
then that the whole scheme of salvation of the Frappes was not simply
doubtful, but impossible. I fired this discovery out into the darkness
with the greatest promptitude.

My abrupt denials certainly scared my cousin amazingly.

At first they could not understand what I was saying, and when they did
I fully believe they expected an instant answer in thunderbolts and
flames. They gave me more room in the bed forthwith, and then the elder
sat up and expressed his sense of my awfulness. I was already a little
frightened at my temerity, but when he asked me categorically to unsay
what I had said, what could I do but confirm my repudiation?

“There’s no hell,” I said, “and no eternal punishment. No God would be
such a fool as that.”

My elder cousin cried aloud in horror, and the younger lay scared, but
listening. “Then you mean,” said my elder cousin, when at last he could
bring himself to argue, “you might do just as you liked?”

