to be an I.D.B.,—an illicit diamond buyer that is to say. A city of
Bladesovers, the capital of a kingdom of Bladesovers, all much shaken
and many altogether in decay, parasitically occupied, insidiously
replaced by alien, unsympathetic and irresponsible elements; and with a
ruling an adventitious and miscellaneous empire of a quarter of this
daedal earth complex laws, intricate social necessities, disturbing
insatiable suggestions, followed from this. Such was the world into
which I had come, into which I had in some way to thrust myself and fit
my problem, my temptations, my efforts, my patriotic instinct, all my
moral instincts, my physical appetites, my dreams and my sanity.

London! I came up to it, young and without advisers, rather priggish,
rather dangerously open-minded and very open-eyed, and with
something—it is, I think, the common gift of imaginative youth, and I
claim it unblushingly—fine in me, finer than the world and seeking fine
responses. I did not want simply to live or simply to live happily or
well; I wanted to serve and do and make—with some nobility. It was in
me. It is in half the youth of the world.

II

I had come to London as a scholar. I had taken the Vincent Bradley
scholarship of the Pharmaceutical Society, but I threw this up when I
found that my work of the Science and Art Department in mathematics,
physics and chemistry had given me one of the minor Technical Board
Scholarships at the Consolidated Technical Schools at South Kensington.
This latter was in mechanics and metallurgy; and I hesitated between
the two. The Vincent Bradley gave me £70 a year and quite the best
start-off a pharmaceutical chemist could have; the South Kensington
thing was worth about twenty-two shillings a week, and the prospects it
opened were vague. But it meant far more scientific work than the
former, and I was still under the impulse of that great intellectual
appetite that is part of the adolescence of men of my type. Moreover it
seemed to lead towards engineering, in which I imagined—I imagine to
this day—my particular use is to be found. I took its greater
uncertainty as a fair risk. I came up very keen, not doubting that the
really hard and steady industry that had carried me through Wimblehurst
would go on still in the new surroundings.

Only from the very first it didn’t....

When I look back now at my Wimblehurst days, I still find myself
surprised at the amount of steady grinding study, of strenuous
self-discipline that I maintained throughout my apprenticeship. In many
ways I think that time was the most honourable period in my life. I
wish I could say with a certain mind that my motives in working so well
were large and honourable too. To a certain extent they were so; there
was a fine sincere curiosity, a desire for the strength and power of
scientific knowledge and a passion for intellectual exercise; but I do
not think those forces alone would have kept me at it so grimly and
closely if Wimblehurst had not been so dull, so limited and so
observant. Directly I came into the London atmosphere, tasting freedom,
tasting irresponsibility and the pull of new forces altogether, my
discipline fell from me like a garment. Wimblehurst to a youngster in
my position offered no temptations worth counting, no interests to
conflict with study, no vices—such vices as it offered were coarsely
stripped of any imaginative glamourfull drunkenness, clumsy leering
shameful lust, no social intercourse even to waste one’s time, and on
the other hand it would minister greatly to the self-esteem of a
conspicuously industrious student. One was marked as “clever,” one
played up to the part, and one’s little accomplishment stood out finely
in one’s private reckoning against the sunlit small ignorance of that
agreeable place. One went with an intent rush across the market square,
one took one’s exercise with as dramatic a sense of an ordered day as
an Oxford don, one burnt the midnight oil quite consciously at the rare
respectful, benighted passer-by. And one stood out finely in the local
paper with one’s unapproachable yearly harvest of certificates. Thus I
was not only a genuinely keen student, but also a little of a prig and
poseur in those days—and the latter kept the former at it, as London
made clear.

Moreover Wimblehurst had given me no outlet in any other direction.

But I did not realise all this when I came to London, did not perceive
how the change of atmosphere began at once to warp and distribute my
energies. In the first place I became invisible. If I idled for a day,
no one except my fellow-students (who evidently had no awe for me)
remarked it. No one saw my midnight taper; no one pointed me out as I
crossed the street as an astonishing intellectual phenomenon. In the
next place I became inconsiderable. In Wimblehurst I felt I stood for
Science; nobody there seemed to have so much as I and to have it so
fully and completely. In London I walked ignorant in an immensity, and
it was clear that among my fellow-students from the midlands and the
north I was ill-equipped and under-trained. With the utmost exertion I
should only take a secondary position among them. And finally, in the
third place, I was distracted by voluminous new interests; London took
hold of me, and Science, which had been the universe, shrank back to
the dimensions of tiresome little formulae compacted in a book. I came
to London in late September, and it was a very different London from
that great greyly-overcast, smoke-stained house-wilderness of my first
impressions. I reached it by Victoria and not by Cannon Street, and its
centre was now in Exhibition Road. It shone, pale amber, blue-grey and
tenderly spacious and fine under clear autumnal skies, a London of
hugely handsome buildings and vistas and distances, a London of gardens
and labyrinthine tall museums, of old trees and remote palaces and
artificial waters. I lodged near by in West Brompton at a house in a
little square.

So London faced me the second time, making me forget altogether for a
while the grey, drizzling city visage that had first looked upon me. I
settled down and went to and fro to my lectures and laboratory; in the
beginning I worked hard, and only slowly did the curiosity that
presently possessed me to know more of this huge urban province arise,
the desire to find something beyond mechanism that I could serve, some
use other than learning. With this was a growing sense of loneliness, a
desire for adventure and intercourse. I found myself in the evenings
poring over a map of London I had bought, instead of copying out
lecture notes—and on Sundays I made explorations, taking omnibus rides
east and west and north and south, and to enlarging and broadening the
sense of great swarming hinterlands of humanity with whom I had no
dealings, of whom I knew nothing....

The whole illimitable place teemed with suggestions of indefinite and
sometimes outrageous possibility, of hidden but magnificent meanings.

It wasn’t simply that I received a vast impression of space and
multitude and opportunity; intimate things also were suddenly dragged
from neglected, veiled and darkened corners into an acute vividness of
perception. Close at hand in the big art museum I came for the first
time upon the beauty of nudity, which I had hitherto held to be a
shameful secret, flaunted and gloried in; I was made aware of beauty as
not only permissible, but desirable and frequent and of a thousand
hitherto unsuspected rich aspects of life. One night in a real rapture,
I walked round the upper gallery of the Albert Hall and listened for
the first time to great music; I believe now that it was a rendering of
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony....

My apprehension of spaces and places was reinforced by a quickened
apprehension of persons. A constant stream of people passed by me, eyes
met and challenged mine and passed—more and more I wanted then to
stay—if I went eastward towards Piccadilly, women who seemed then to my
boyish inexperience softly splendid and alluring, murmured to me as
they passed. Extraordinarily life unveiled. The very hoardings
clamoured strangely at one’s senses and curiosities. One bought
pamphlets and papers full of strange and daring ideas transcending
one’s boldest; in the parks one heard men discussing the very existence
of God, denying the rights of property, debating a hundred things that
one dared not think about in Wimblehurst. And after the ordinary
overcast day, after dull mornings, came twilight, and London lit up and
became a thing of white and yellow and red jewels of light and
wonderful floods of golden illumination and stupendous and unfathomable
shadows—and there were no longer any mean or shabby people—but a great
mysterious movement of unaccountable beings....

Always I was coming on the queerest new aspects. Late one Saturday
night I found myself one of a great slow-moving crowd between the
blazing shops and the flaring barrows in the Harrow Road; I got into
conversation with two bold-eyed girls, bought them boxes of chocolate,
made the acquaintance of father and mother and various younger brothers
and sisters, sat in a public-house hilariously with them all, standing
and being stood drinks, and left them in the small hours at the door of
“home,” never to see them again. And once I was accosted on the
outskirts of a Salvation Army meeting in one of the parks by a
silk-hatted young man of eager and serious discourse, who argued
against scepticism with me, invited me home to tea into a clean and
cheerful family of brothers and sisters and friends, and there I spent
the evening singing hymns to the harmonium (which reminded me of
half-forgotten Chatham), and wishing all the sisters were not so
obviously engaged....

Then on the remote hill of this boundless city-world I found Ewart.

III

How well I remember the first morning, a bright Sunday morning in early
October, when I raided in upon Ewart! I found my old schoolfellow in
bed in a room over an oil-shop in a back street at the foot of Highgate
Hill. His landlady, a pleasant, dirty young woman with soft-brown eyes,
brought down his message for me to come up; and up I went. The room
presented itself as ample and interesting in detail and shabby with a
quite commendable shabbiness. I had an impression of brown walls—they
were papered with brown paper—of a long shelf along one side of the
room, with dusty plaster casts and a small cheap lay figure of a horse,
of a table and something of grey wax partially covered with a cloth,
and of scattered drawings. There was a gas stove in one corner, and
some enameled ware that had been used for overnight cooking. The
oilcloth on the floor was streaked with a peculiar white dust. Ewart
himself was not in the first instance visible, but only a fourfold
canvas screen at the end of the room from which shouts proceeded of
“Come on!” then his wiry black hair, very much rumpled, and a staring
red-brown eye and his stump of a nose came round the edge of this at a
height of about three feet from the ground “It’s old Ponderevo!” he
said, “the Early bird! And he’s caught the worm! By Jove, but it’s cold
this morning! Come round here and sit on the bed!”

I walked round, wrung his hand, and we surveyed one another.

He was lying on a small wooden fold-up bed, the scanty covering of
which was supplemented by an overcoat and an elderly but still cheerful
pair of check trousers, and he was wearing pajamas of a virulent pink
and green. His neck seemed longer and more stringy than it had been
even in our schooldays, and his upper lip had a wiry black moustache.
The rest of his ruddy, knobby countenance, his erratic hair and his
general hairy leanness had not even—to my perceptions grown.

“By Jove!” he said, “you’ve got quite decent-looking, Ponderevo! What
do you think of me?”

“You’re all right. What are you doing here?”

“Art, my son—sculpture! And incidentally—” He hesitated. “I ply a
trade. Will you hand me that pipe and those smoking things? So! You
can’t make coffee, eh? Well, try your hand. Cast down this
screen—no—fold it up and so we’ll go into the other room. I’ll keep in
bed all the same. The fire’s a gas stove. Yes. Don’t make it bang. too
loud as you light it—I can’t stand it this morning. You won’t smoke ...
Well, it does me good to see you again, Ponderevo. Tell me what you’re
doing, and how you’re getting on.”

He directed me in the service of his simple hospitality, and presently
I came back to his bed and sat down and smiled at him there, smoking
comfortably, with his hands under his head, surveying me.

“How’s Life’s Morning, Ponderevo? By Jove, it must be nearly six years
since we met! They’ve got moustaches. We’ve fleshed ourselves a bit,
eh? And you?”

I felt a pipe was becoming after all, and that lit, I gave him a
favourable sketch of my career.

“Science! And you’ve worked like that! While I’ve been potting round
doing odd jobs for stone-masons and people, and trying to get to
sculpture. I’ve a sort of feeling that the chisel—I began with
painting, Ponderevo, and found I was colour-blind, colour-blind enough
to stop it. I’ve drawn about and thought about—thought more
particularly. I give myself three days a week as an art student, and
the rest of the time I’ve a sort of trade that keeps me. And we’re
still in the beginning of things, young men starting. Do you remember
the old times at Goudhurst, our doll’s-house island, the Retreat of the
Ten Thousand Young Holmes and the rabbits, eh? It’s surprising, if you
think of it, to find we are still young. And we used to talk of what we
would be, and we used to talk of love! I suppose you know all about
that now, Ponderevo?”

I finished and hesitated on some vague foolish lie, “No,” I said, a
little ashamed of the truth. “Do you? I’ve been too busy.”

“I’m just beginning—just as we were then. Things happen.”

He sucked at his pipe for a space and stared at the plaster cast of a
flayed hand that hung on the wall.

“The fact is, Ponderevo, I’m beginning to find life a most
extraordinary queer set-out; the things that pull one, the things that
don’t. The wants—This business of sex. It’s a net. No end to it, no way
out of it, no sense in it. There are times when women take possession
of me, when my mind is like a painted ceiling at Hampton Court with the
pride of the flesh sprawling all over it. _Why>?_... And then again
sometimes when I have to encounter a woman, I am overwhelmed by a
terror of tantalising boredom—I fly, I hide, I do anything. You’ve got
your scientific explanations perhaps; what’s Nature and the universe up
to in that matter?”

“It’s her way, I gather, of securing the continuity of the species.”

“But it doesn’t,” said Ewart. “That’s just it! No. I have succumbed
to—dissipation—down the hill there. Euston Road way. And it was damned
ugly and mean, and I hate having done it. And the continuity of the
species—Lord!... And why does Nature make a man so infernally ready for
drinks? There’s no sense in that anyhow.” He sat up in bed, to put this
question with the greater earnestness. “And why has she given me a most
violent desire towards sculpture and an equally violent desire to leave
off work directly I begin it, eh?... Let’s have some more coffee. I put
it to you, these things puzzle me, Ponderevo. They dishearten me. They
keep me in bed.”

He had an air of having saved up these difficulties for me for some
time. He sat with his chin almost touching his knees, sucking at his
pipe.

“That’s what I mean,” he went on, “when I say life is getting on to me
as extraordinarily queer, I don’t see my game, nor why I was invited.
And I don’t make anything of the world outside either. What do _you_
make of it?”

“London,” I began. “It’s—so enormous!”

“Isn’t it! And it’s all up to nothing. You find chaps keeping grocers’
shops—why the _devil_, Ponderevo, do they keep grocers’ shops? They all
do it very carefully, very steadily, very meanly. You find people
running about and doing the most remarkable things being policemen, for
example, and burglars. They go about these businesses quite gravely and
earnestly. I somehow—can’t go about mine. Is there any sense in it at
all—anywhere?”

“There must be sense in it,” I said. “We’re young.”

“We’re young—yes. But one must inquire. The grocer’s a grocer because,
I suppose, he sees he comes in there. Feels that on the whole it
amounts to a call.... But the bother is I don’t see where I come in at
all. Do you?”

“Where _you_ come in?”

“No, where _you _come in.”

“Not exactly, yet,” I said. “I want to do some good in the
world—something—something effectual, before I die. I have a sort of
idea my scientific work—I don’t know.”

“Yes,” he mused. “And I’ve got a sort of idea my sculpture,—but _how_
it is to come in and _why_,—I’ve no idea at all.” He hugged his knees
for a space. “That’s what puzzles me, Ponderevo, no end.”

He became animated. “If you will look in that cupboard,” he said, “you
will find an old respectable looking roll on a plate and a knife
somewhere and a gallipot containing butter. You give them me and I’ll
make my breakfast, and then if you don’t mind watching me paddle about
at my simple toilet I’ll get up. Then we’ll go for a walk and talk
about this affair of life further. And about Art and Literature and
anything else that crops up on the way.... Yes, that’s the gallipot.
Cockroach got in it? Chuck him out—damned interloper....”

So in the first five minutes of our talk, as I seem to remember it now,
old Ewart struck the note that ran through all that morning’s
intercourse....

To me it was a most memorable talk because it opened out quite new
horizons of thought. I’d been working rather close and out of touch
with Ewart’s free gesticulating way. He was pessimistic that day and
sceptical to the very root of things. He made me feel clearly, what I
had not felt at all before, the general adventurousness of life,
particularly of life at the stage we had reached, and also the absence
of definite objects, of any concerted purpose in the lives that were
going on all round us. He made me feel, too, how ready I was to take up
commonplace assumptions. Just as I had always imagined that somewhere
in social arrangements there was certainly a Head-Master who would
intervene if one went too far, so I had always had a sort of implicit
belief that in our England there were somewhere people who understood
what we were all, as a nation, about. That crumpled into his pit of
doubt and vanished.

He brought out, sharply cut and certain, the immense effect of
purposelessness in London that I was already indistinctly feeling. We
found ourselves at last returning through Highgate Cemetery and
Waterlow Park—and Ewart was talking.

“Look at it there,” he said, stopping and pointing to the great vale of
London spreading wide and far. “It’s like a sea—and we swim in it. And
at last down we go, and then up we come—washed up here.” He swung his
arms to the long slopes about us, tombs and headstones in long
perspectives, in limitless rows.

“We’re young, Ponderevo, but sooner or later our whitened memories will
wash up on one of these beaches, on some such beach as this. George
