Ponderevo, F.R.S., Sidney Ewart, R.I.P. Look at the rows of ’em!”

He paused. “Do you see that hand? The hand, I mean, pointing upward, on
the top of a blunted obelisk. Yes. Well, that’s what I do for a
living—when I’m not thinking, or drinking, or prowling, or making love,
or pretending I’m trying to be a sculptor without either the money or
the morals for a model. See? And I do those hearts afire and those
pensive angel guardians with the palm of peace. Damned well I do ’em
and damned cheap! I’m a sweated victim, Ponderevo...”

That was the way of it, anyhow. I drank deep of talk that day; we went
into theology, into philosophy; I had my first glimpse of socialism. I
felt as though I had been silent in a silence since I and he had
parted. At the thought of socialism Ewart’s moods changed for a time to
a sort of energy. “After all, all this confounded vagueness _might_ be
altered. If you could get men to work together...”

It was a good talk that rambled through all the universe. I thought I
was giving my mind refreshment, but indeed it was dissipation. All
sorts of ideas, even now, carry me back as it were to a fountain-head,
to Waterlow Park and my resuscitated Ewart. There stretches away south
of us long garden slopes and white gravestones and the wide expanse of
London, and somewhere in the picture is a red old wall, sun-warmed, and
a great blaze of Michaelmas daisies set off with late golden sunflowers
and a drift of mottled, blood-red, fallen leaves. It was with me that
day as though I had lifted my head suddenly out of dull and immediate
things and looked at life altogether.... But it played the very devil
with the copying up of my arrears of notes to which I had vowed the
latter half of that day.

After that reunion Ewart and I met much and talked much, and in our
subsequent encounters his monologue was interrupted and I took my
share. He had exercised me so greatly that I lay awake at nights
thinking him over, and discoursed and answered him in my head as I went
in the morning to the College. I am by nature a doer and only by the
way a critic; his philosophical assertion of the incalculable vagueness
of life which fitted his natural indolence roused my more irritable and
energetic nature to active protests. “It’s all so pointless,” I said,
“because people are slack and because it’s in the ebb of an age. But
you’re a socialist. Well, let’s bring that about! And there’s a
purpose. There you are!”

Ewart gave me all my first conceptions of socialism; in a little while
I was an enthusiastic socialist and he was a passive resister to the
practical exposition of the theories he had taught me. “We must join
some organisation,” I said. “We ought to do things.... We ought to go
and speak at street corners. People don’t know.”

You must figure me a rather ill-dressed young man in a state of great
earnestness, standing up in that shabby studio of his and saying these
things, perhaps with some gesticulations, and Ewart with a clay-smudged
face, dressed perhaps in a flannel shirt and trousers, with a pipe in
his mouth, squatting philosophically at a table, working at some chunk
of clay that never got beyond suggestion.

“I wonder why one doesn’t want to,” he said.

It was only very slowly I came to gauge Ewart’s real position in the
scheme of things, to understand how deliberate and complete was this
detachment of his from the moral condemnation and responsibilities that
played so fine a part in his talk. His was essentially the nature of an
artistic appreciator; he could find interest and beauty in endless
aspects of things that I marked as evil, or at least as not negotiable;
and the impulse I had towards self-deception, to sustained and
consistent self-devotion, disturbed and detached and pointless as it
was at that time, he had indeed a sort of admiration for but no
sympathy. Like many fantastic and ample talkers he was at bottom
secretive, and he gave me a series of little shocks of discovery
throughout our intercourse.

The first of these came in the realisation that he quite seriously
meant to do nothing in the world at all towards reforming the evils he
laid bare in so easy and dexterous a manner. The next came in the
sudden appearance of a person called “Milly”—I’ve forgotten her
surname—whom I found in his room one evening, simply attired in a blue
wrap—the rest of her costume behind the screen—smoking cigarettes and
sharing a flagon of an amazingly cheap and self-assertive grocer’s wine
Ewart affected, called “Canary Sack.” “Hullo!” said Ewart, as I came
in. “This is Milly, you know. She’s been being a model—she IS a model
really.... (keep calm, Ponderevo!) Have some sack?”

Milly was a woman of thirty, perhaps, with a broad, rather pretty face,
a placid disposition, a bad accent and delightful blond hair that waved
off her head with an irrepressible variety of charm; and whenever Ewart
spoke she beamed at him. Ewart was always sketching this hair of hers
and embarking upon clay statuettes of her that were never finished. She
was, I know now, a woman of the streets, whom Ewart had picked up in
the most casual manner, and who had fallen in love with him, but my
inexperience in those days was too great for me to place her then, and
Ewart offered no elucidations. She came to him, he went to her, they
took holidays together in the country when certainly she sustained her
fair share of their expenditure. I suspect him now even of taking money
from her. Odd old Ewart! It was a relationship so alien to my orderly
conceptions of honour, to what I could imagine any friend of mine
doing, that I really hardly saw it with it there under my nose. But I
see it and I think I understand it now....

Before I fully grasped the discursive manner in which Ewart was
committed to his particular way in life, I did, I say, as the broad
constructive ideas of socialism took hold of me, try to get him to work
with me in some definite fashion as a socialist.

“We ought to join on to other socialists,” I said.

“They’ve got something.”

“Let’s go and look at some first.”

After some pains we discovered the office of the Fabian Society,
lurking in a cellar in Clement’s Inn; and we went and interviewed a
rather discouraging secretary who stood astraddle in front of a fire
and questioned us severely and seemed to doubt the integrity of our
intentions profoundly. He advised us to attend the next open meeting in
Clifford’s Inn and gave us the necessary data. We both contrived to get
to the affair, and heard a discursive gritty paper on Trusts and one of
the most inconclusive discussions you can imagine. Three-quarters of
the speakers seemed under some jocular obsession which took the form of
pretending to be conceited. It was a sort of family joke, and as
strangers to the family we did not like it.... As we came out through
the narrow passage from Clifford’s Inn to the Strand, Ewart suddenly
pitched upon a wizened, spectacled little man in a vast felt hat and a
large orange tie.

“How many members are there in this Fabian Society of yours?” he asked.

The little man became at once defensive in his manner.

“About seven hundred,” he said; “perhaps eight.”

“Like—like the ones here?”

The little man gave a nervous self-satisfied laugh. “I suppose they’re
up to sample,” he said.

The little man dropped out of existence and we emerged upon the Strand.
Ewart twisted his arm into a queerly eloquent gesture that gathered up
all the tall façades of the banks, the business places, the projecting
clock and towers of the Law Courts, the advertisements, the luminous
signs, into one social immensity, into a capitalistic system gigantic
and invincible.

“These socialists have no sense of proportion,” he said. “What can you
expect of them?”

IV

Ewart, as the embodiment of talk, was certainly a leading factor in my
conspicuous failure to go on studying. Social theory in its first crude
form of Democratic Socialism gripped my intelligence more and more
powerfully. I argued in the laboratory with the man who shared my bench
until we quarreled and did not speak and also I fell in love.

The ferment of sex had been creeping into my being like a slowly
advancing tide through all my Wimblehurst days, the stimulus of London
was like the rising of a wind out of the sea that brings the waves in
fast and high. Ewart had his share in that. More and more acutely and
unmistakably did my perception of beauty, form and sound, my desire for
adventure, my desire for intercourse, converge on this central and
commanding business of the individual life. I had to get me a mate.

I began to fall in love faintly with girls I passed in the street, with
women who sat before me in trains, with girl fellow-students, with
ladies in passing carriages, with loiterers at the corners, with
neat-handed waitresses in shops and tea-rooms, with pictures even of
girls and women. On my rare visits to the theatre I always became
exalted, and found the actresses and even the spectators about me
mysterious, attractive, creatures of deep interest and desire. I had a
stronger and stronger sense that among these glancing, passing
multitudes there was somewhere one who was for me. And in spite of
every antagonistic force in the world, there was something in my very
marrow that insisted: “Stop! Look at this one! Think of her! Won’t she
do? This signifies—this before all things signifies! Stop! Why are you
hurrying by? This may be the predestined person—before all others.”

It is odd that I can’t remember when first I saw Marion, who became my
wife—whom I was to make wretched, who was to make me wretched, who was
to pluck that fine generalised possibility of love out of my early
manhood and make it a personal conflict. I became aware of her as one
of a number of interesting attractive figures that moved about in my
world, that glanced back at my eyes, that flitted by with a kind of
averted watchfulness. I would meet her coming through the Art Museum,
which was my short cut to the Brompton Road, or see her sitting,
reading as I thought, in one of the bays of the Education Library. But
really, as I found out afterwards, she never read. She used to come
there to eat a bun in quiet. She was a very gracefully-moving figure of
a girl then, very plainly dressed, with dark brown hair I remember, in
a knot low on her neck behind that confessed the pretty roundness of
her head and harmonised with the admirable lines of ears and cheek, the
grave serenity of mouth and brow.

She stood out among the other girls very distinctly because they
dressed more than she did, struck emphatic notes of colour, startled
one by novelties in hats and bows and things. I’ve always hated the
rustle, the disconcerting colour boundaries, the smart unnatural angles
of women’s clothes. Her plain black dress gave her a starkness....

I do remember, though, how one afternoon I discovered the peculiar
appeal of her form for me. I had been restless with my work and had
finally slipped out of the Laboratory and come over to the Art Museum
to lounge among the pictures. I came upon her in an odd corner of the
Sheepshanks gallery, intently copying something from a picture that
hung high. I had just been in the gallery of casts from the antique, my
mind was all alive with my newly awakened sense of line, and there she
stood with face upturned, her body drooping forward from the hips just
a little—memorably graceful—feminine.

After that I know I sought to see her, felt a distinctive emotion at
her presence, began to imagine things about her. I no longer thought of
generalised womanhood or of this casual person or that. I thought of
her.

An accident brought us together. I found myself one Monday morning in
an omnibus staggering westward from Victoria—I was returning from a
Sunday I’d spent at Wimblehurst in response to a unique freak of
hospitality on the part of Mr. Mantell. She was the sole other inside
passenger. And when the time came to pay her fare, she became an
extremely scared, disconcerted and fumbling young woman; she had left
her purse at home.

Luckily I had some money.

She looked at me with startled, troubled brown eyes; she permitted my
proffered payment to the conductor with a certain ungraciousness that
seemed a part of her shyness, and then as she rose to go, she thanked
me with an obvious affectation of ease.

“Thank you so much,” she said in a pleasant soft voice; and then less
gracefully, “Awfully kind of you, you know.”

I fancy I made polite noises. But just then I wasn’t disposed to be
critical. I was full of the sense of her presence; her arm was
stretched out over me as she moved past me, the gracious slenderness of
her body was near me. The words we used didn’t seem very greatly to
matter. I had vague ideas of getting out with her—and I didn’t.

That encounter, I have no doubt, exercised me enormously. I lay awake
at night rehearsing it, and wondering about the next phase of our
relationship. That took the form of the return of my twopence. I was in
the Science Library, digging something out of the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_, when she appeared beside me and placed on the open page an
evidently premeditated thin envelope, bulgingly confessing the coins
within.

“It was so very kind of you,” she said, “the other day. I don’t know
what I should have done, Mr.—”

I supplied my name. “I knew,” I said, “you were a student here.”

“Not exactly a student. I—”

“Well, anyhow, I knew you were here frequently. And I’m a student
myself at the Consolidated Technical Schools.”

I plunged into autobiography and questionings, and so entangled her in
a conversation that got a quality of intimacy through the fact that,
out of deference to our fellow-readers, we were obliged to speak in
undertones. And I have no doubt that in substance it was singularly
banal. Indeed I have an impression that all our early conversations
were incredibly banal. We met several times in a manner
half-accidental, half furtive and wholly awkward. Mentally I didn’t
take hold of her. I never did take hold of her mentally. Her talk, I
now know all too clearly, was shallow, pretentious, evasive. Only—even
to this day—I don’t remember it as in any way vulgar. She was, I could
see quite clearly, anxious to overstate or conceal her real social
status, a little desirous to be taken for a student in the art school
and a little ashamed that she wasn’t. She came to the museum to “copy
things,” and this, I gathered, had something to do with some way of
partially earning her living that I wasn’t to inquire into. I told her
things about myself, vain things that I felt might appeal to her, but
that I learnt long afterwards made her think me “conceited.” We talked
of books, but there she was very much on her guard and secretive, and
rather more freely of pictures. She “liked” pictures. I think from the
outset I appreciated and did not for a moment resent that hers was a
commonplace mind, that she was the unconscious custodian of something
that had gripped my most intimate instinct, that she embodied the hope
of a possibility, was the careless proprietor of a physical quality
that had turned my head like strong wine. I felt I had to stick to our
acquaintance, flat as it was. Presently we should get through these
irrelevant exterior things, and come to the reality of love beneath.

I saw her in dreams released, as it were, from herself, beautiful,
worshipful, glowing. And sometimes when we were together, we would come
on silences through sheer lack of matter, and then my eyes would feast
on her, and the silence seemed like the drawing back of a curtain—her
superficial self. Odd, I confess. Odd, particularly, the enormous hold
of certain things about her upon me, a certain slight rounded duskiness
of skin, a certain perfection of modelling in her lips, her brow, a
certain fine flow about the shoulders. She wasn’t indeed beautiful to
many people—these things are beyond explaining. She had manifest
defects of form and feature, and they didn’t matter at all. Her
complexion was bad, but I don’t think it would have mattered if it had
been positively unwholesome. I had extraordinarily limited,
extraordinarily painful, desires. I longed intolerably to kiss her
lips.

V

The affair was immensely serious and commanding to me. I don’t remember
that in these earlier phases I had any thought of turning back at all.
It was clear to me that she regarded me with an eye entirely more
critical than I had for her, that she didn’t like my scholarly
untidiness, my want of even the most commonplace style. “Why do you
wear collars like that?” she said, and sent me in pursuit of
gentlemanly neckwear. I remember when she invited me a little abruptly
one day to come to tea at her home on the following Sunday and meet her
father and mother and aunt, that I immediately doubted whether my
hitherto unsuspected best clothes would create the impression she
desired me to make on her belongings. I put off the encounter until the
Sunday after, to get myself in order. I had a morning coat made and I
bought a silk hat, and had my reward in the first glance of admiration
she ever gave me. I wonder how many of my sex are as preposterous. I
was, you see, abandoning all my beliefs, my conventions unasked. I was
forgetting myself immensely. And there was a conscious shame in it all.
Never a word—did I breathe to Ewart—to any living soul of what was
going on.

Her father and mother and aunt struck me as the dismalest of people,
and her home in Walham Green was chiefly notable for its black and
amber tapestry carpets and curtains and table-cloths, and the age and
irrelevance of its books, mostly books with faded gilt on the covers.
The windows were fortified against the intrusive eye by cheap lace
curtains and an “art pot” upon an unstable octagonal table. Several
framed Art School drawings of Marion’s, bearing official South
Kensington marks of approval, adorned the room, and there was a black
and gilt piano with a hymn-book on the top of it. There were draped
mirrors over all the mantels, and above the sideboard in the
dining-room in which we sat at tea was a portrait of her father,
villainously truthful after the manner of such works. I couldn’t see a
trace of the beauty I found in her in either parent, yet she somehow
contrived to be like them both.

These people pretended in a way that reminded me of the Three Great
Women in my mother’s room, but they had not nearly so much social
knowledge and did not do it nearly so well. Also, I remarked, they did
it with an eye on Marion. They had wanted to thank me, they said, for
the kindness to their daughter in the matter of the ‘bus fare, and so
accounted for anything unusual in their invitation. They posed as
simple gentlefolk, a little hostile to the rush and gadding-about of
London, preferring a secluded and unpretentious quiet.

When Marion got out the white table-cloth from the sideboard-drawer for
tea, a card bearing the word “APARTMENTS” fell to the floor. I picked
it up and gave it to her before I realised from her quickened colour
that I should not have seen it; that probably had been removed from the
window in honour of my coming.

Her father spoke once in a large remote way of he claims of business
engagements, and it was only long afterwards I realised that he was a
supernumerary clerk in the Walham Green Gas Works and otherwise a
useful man at home. He was a large, loose, fattish man with
unintelligent brown eyes magnified by spectacles; he wore an
ill-fitting frock-coat and a paper collar, and he showed me, as his
great treasure and interest, a large Bible which he had grangerised
with photographs of pictures. Also he cultivated the little garden-yard
behind the house, and he had a small greenhouse with tomatoes. “I wish
I ’ad ’eat,” he said. “One can do such a lot with ’eat. But I suppose
you can’t ’ave everything you want in this world.”

Both he and Marion’s mother treated her with a deference that struck me
as the most natural thing in the world. Her own manner changed, became
more authoritative and watchful, her shyness disappeared. She had taken
a line of her own I gathered, draped the mirror, got the second-hand
piano, and broken her parents in.

Her mother must once have been a pretty woman; she had regular features
and Marion’s hair without its lustre, but she was thin and careworn.
The aunt, Miss Ramboat, was a large, abnormally shy person very like
her brother, and I don’t recall anything she said on this occasion.

To begin with there was a good deal of tension, Marion was frightfully
nervous and every one was under the necessity of behaving in a
mysteriously unreal fashion until I plunged, became talkative and made
a certain ease and interest. I told them of the schools, of my
lodgings, of Wimblehurst and my apprenticeship days. “There’s a lot of
this Science about nowadays,” Mr. Ramboat reflected; “but I sometimes
wonder a bit what good it is?”

I was young enough to be led into what he called “a bit of a
discussion,” which Marion truncated before our voices became unduly
raised. “I dare say,” she said, “there’s much to be said on both
sides.”

I remember Marion’s mother asked me what church I attended, and that I
replied evasively. After tea there was music and we sang hymns. I
doubted if I had a voice when this was proposed, but that was held to
be a trivial objection, and I found sitting close beside the sweep of
hair from Marion’s brow had many compensations. I discovered her mother
sitting in the horsehair armchair and regarding us sentimentally. I
went for a walk with Marion towards Putney Bridge, and then there was
more singing and a supper of cold bacon and pie, after which Mr.
Ramboat and I smoked. During that walk, I remember, she told me the
import of her sketchings and copyings in the museum. A cousin of a
friend of hers whom she spoke of as Smithie, had developed an original
business in a sort of tea-gown garment which she called a Persian Robe,
a plain sort of wrap with a gaily embroidered yoke, and Marion went
there and worked in the busy times. In the times that weren’t busy she
designed novelties in yokes by an assiduous use of eyes and note-book
in the museum, and went home and traced out the captured forms on the
foundation material. “I don’t get much,” said Marion, “but it’s
interesting, and in the busy times we work all day. Of course the
workgirls are dreadfully common, but we don’t say much to them. And
Smithie talks enough for ten.”

I quite understood the workgirls were dreadfully common.

I don’t remember that the Walham Green _ménage_ and the quality of
these people, nor the light they threw on Marion, detracted in the
slightest degree at that time from the intent resolve that held me to
make her mine. I didn’t like them. But I took them as part of the
affair. Indeed, on the whole, I think they threw her up by an effect of
contrast; she was so obviously controlling them, so consciously
superior to them.

More and more of my time did I give to this passion that possessed me.
I began to think chiefly of ways of pleasing Marion, of acts of
devotion, of treats, of sumptuous presents for her, of appeals she
would understand. If at times she was manifestly unintelligent, in her
ignorance became indisputable, I told myself her simple instincts were
worth all the education and intelligence in the world. And to this day
I think I wasn’t really wrong about her. There was something
extraordinarily fine about her, something simple and high, that
flickered in and out of her ignorance and commonness and limitations
like the tongue from the mouth of a snake....

One night I was privileged to meet her and bring her home from an
entertainment at the Birkbeck Institute. We came back on the
underground railway and we travelled first-class—that being the highest
class available. We were alone in the carriage, and for the first time
I ventured to put my arm about her.

“You mustn’t,” she said feebly.

“I love you,” I whispered suddenly with my heart beating wildly, drew
her to me, drew all her beauty to me and kissed her cool and
unresisting lips.

“Love me?” she said, struggling away from me, “Don’t!” and then, as the
train ran into a station, “You must tell no one.... I don’t know....
You shouldn’t have done that....”

Then two other people got in with us and terminated my wooing for a
time.

When we found ourselves alone together, walking towards Battersea, she
had decided to be offended. I parted from her unforgiven and terribly
distressed.

When we met again, she told me I must never say “that” again.

I had dreamt that to kiss her lips was ultimate satisfaction. But it
was indeed only the beginning of desires. I told her my one ambition
was to marry her.

“But,” she said, “you’re not in a position—What’s the good of talking
like that?”

I stared at her. “I mean to,” I said.

“You can’t,” she answered. “It will be years”

“But I love you,” I insisted.

I stood not a yard from the sweet lips I had kissed; I stood within
arm’s length of the inanimate beauty I desired to quicken, and I saw
opening between us a gulf of years, toil, waiting, disappointments and
an immense uncertainty.

“I love you,” I said. “Don’t you love me?”

She looked me in the face with grave irresponsive eyes.

“I don’t know,” she said. “I _like_ you, of course.... One has to be
sensibl...”

I can remember now my sense of frustration by her unresilient reply. I
should have perceived then that for her my ardour had no quickening
fire. But how was I to know? I had let myself come to want her, my
imagination endowed her with infinite possibilities. I wanted her and
wanted her, stupidly and instinctively....

“But,” I said “Love—!”

“One has to be sensible,” she replied. “I like going about with you.
Can’t we keep as we are?’”

VI

Well, you begin to understand my breakdown now, I have been copious
enough with these apologia. My work got more and more spiritless, my
behaviour degenerated, my punctuality declined; I was more and more
outclassed in the steady grind by my fellow-students. Such supplies of
moral energy as I still had at command shaped now in the direction of
serving Marion rather than science.

I fell away dreadfully, more and more I shirked and skulked; the humped
men from the north, the pale men with thin, clenched minds, the intent,
hard-breathing students I found against me, fell at last from keen
rivalry to moral contempt. Even a girl got above me upon one of the
lists. Then indeed I made it a point of honour to show by my public
disregard of every rule that I really did not even pretend to try.

So one day I found myself sitting in a mood of considerable
astonishment in Kensington Gardens, reacting on a recent heated
interview with the school Registrar in which I had displayed more
spirit than sense. I was astonished chiefly at my stupendous falling
away from all the militant ideals of unflinching study I had brought up
from Wimblehurst. I had displayed myself, as the Registrar put it, “an
unmitigated rotter.” My failure to get marks in the written examination
had only been equalled by the insufficiency of my practical work.

“I ask you,” the Registrar had said, “what will become of you when your
scholarship runs out?”

It certainly was an interesting question. What _was_ going to become of
me?

It was clear there would be nothing for me in the schools as I had once
dared to hope; there seemed, indeed, scarcely anything in the world
except an illpaid assistantship in some provincial organized Science
School or grammar school. I knew that for that sort of work, without a
degree or any qualification, one earned hardly a bare living and had
little leisure to struggle up to anything better. If only I had even as
little as fifty pounds I might hold out in London and take my B.Sc.
degree, and quadruple my chances! My bitterness against my uncle
returned at the thought. After all, he had some of my money still, or
ought to have. Why shouldn’t I act within my rights, threaten to ‘take
proceedings’? I meditated for a space on the idea, and then returned to
the Science Library and wrote him a very considerable and occasionally
pungent letter.

That letter to my uncle was the nadir of my failure. Its remarkable
consequences, which ended my student days altogether, I will tell in
the next chapter.

I say “my failure.” Yet there are times when I can even doubt whether
that period was a failure at all, when I become defensively critical of
those exacting courses I did not follow, the encyclopaedic process of
scientific exhaustion from which I was distracted. My mind was not
inactive, even if it fed on forbidden food. I did not learn what my
professors and demonstrators had resolved I should learn, but I learnt
many things. My mind learnt to swing wide and to swing by itself.

After all, those other fellows who took high places in the College
examinations and were the professor’s model boys haven’t done so
amazingly. Some are professors themselves, some technical experts; not
one can show things done such as I, following my own interest, have
achieved. For I have built boats that smack across the water like
whiplashes; no one ever dreamt of such boats until I built them; and I
have surprised three secrets that are more than technical discoveries,
in the unexpected hiding-places of Nature. I have come nearer flying
than any man has done. Could I have done as much if I had had a turn
for obeying those rather mediocre professors at the college who
proposed to train my mind? If I had been _trained_ in research—that
ridiculous contradiction in terms—should I have done more than produce
additions to the existing store of little papers with blunted
conclusions, of which there are already too many? I see no sense in
mock modesty upon this matter. Even by the standards of worldly success
I am, by the side of my fellow-students, no failure. I had my F.R.S. by
the time I was thirty-seven, and if I am not very wealthy poverty is as
far from me as the Spanish Inquisition. Suppose I had stamped down on
the head of my wandering curiosity, locked my imagination in a box just
when it wanted to grow out to things, worked by so-and-so’s excellent
method and so-and-so’s indications, where should I be now?

I may be all wrong in this. It may be I should be a far more efficient
man than I am if I had cut off all those divergent expenditures of
energy, plugged up my curiosity about society with more currently
acceptable rubbish or other, abandoned Ewart, evaded Marion instead of
pursuing her, concentrated. But I don’t believe it!

However, I certainly believed it completely and was filled with remorse
on that afternoon when I sat dejectedly in Kensington Gardens and
reviewed, in the light of the Registrar’s pertinent questions my first
two years in London.




CHAPTER THE SECOND
THE DAWN COMES, AND MY UNCLE APPEARS IN A NEW SILK HAT


I

Throughout my student days I had not seen my uncle. I refrained from
going to him in spite of an occasional regret that in this way I
estranged myself from my aunt Susan, and I maintained a sulky attitude
of mind towards him. And I don’t think that once in all that time I
gave a thought to that mystic word of his that was to alter all the
world for us. Yet I had not altogether forgotten it. It was with a
touch of memory, dim transient perplexity if no more—why did this thing
seem in some way personal?—that I read a new inscription upon the
hoardings:

THE SECRET OF VIGOUR,
TONO-BUNGAY.


That was all. It was simple and yet in some way arresting. I found
myself repeating the word after I had passed; it roused one’s attention
like the sound of distant guns. “Tono”—what’s that? and deep, rich,
unhurrying;—“_bun_—gay!”

Then came my uncle’s amazing telegram, his answer to my hostile note:
“_Come to me at once you are wanted three hundred a year certain
tono-bungay._”

“By Jove!” I cried, “of course!

“It’s something—. A patent-medicine! I wonder what he wants with me.”

In his Napoleonic way my uncle had omitted to give an address. His
telegram had been handed in at Farringdon Road, and after complex
meditations I replied to Ponderevo, Farringdon Road, trusting to the
rarity of our surname to reach him.

“Where are you?” I asked.

His reply came promptly:

“192A, Raggett Street, E.C.”

The next day I took an unsanctioned holiday after the morning’s
lecture. I discovered my uncle in a wonderfully new silk hat—oh, a
splendid hat! with a rolling brim that went beyond the common fashion.
It was decidedly too big for him—that was its only fault. It was stuck
on the back of his head, and he was in a white waistcoat and shirt
sleeves. He welcomed me with a forgetfulness of my bitter satire and my
hostile abstinence that was almost divine. His glasses fell off at the
sight of me. His round inexpressive eyes shone brightly. He held out
his plump short hand.

“Here we are, George! What did I tell you? Needn’t whisper it now, my
boy. Shout it—_loud!_ spread it about! Tell every one! Tono—TONO—,
TONO-BUNGAY!”

Raggett Street, you must understand, was a thoroughfare over which some
one had distributed large quantities of cabbage stumps and leaves. It
opened out of the upper end of Farringdon Street, and 192A was a shop
with the plate-glass front coloured chocolate, on which several of the
same bills I had read upon the hoardings had been stuck. The floor was
covered by street mud that had been brought in on dirty boots, and
three energetic young men of the hooligan type, in neck-wraps and caps,
were packing wooden cases with papered-up bottles, amidst much straw
and confusion. The counter was littered with these same swathed
bottles, of a pattern then novel but now amazingly familiar in the
world, the blue paper with the coruscating figure of a genially nude
giant, and the printed directions of how under practically all
circumstances to take Tono-Bungay. Beyond the counter on one side
opened a staircase down which I seem to remember a girl descending with
a further consignment of bottles, and the rest of the background was a
high partition, also chocolate, with “Temporary Laboratory” inscribed
upon it in white letters, and over a door that pierced it, “Office.”
Here I rapped, inaudible amid much hammering, and then entered
unanswered to find my uncle, dressed as I have described, one hand
gripping a sheath of letters, and the other scratching his head as he
dictated to one of three toiling typewriter girls. Behind him was a
further partition and a door inscribed “ABSOLUTELY PRIVATE—NO
ADMISSION,” thereon. This partition was of wood painted the universal
chocolate, up to about eight feet from the ground, and then of glass.
Through the glass I saw dimly a crowded suggestion of crucibles and
glass retorts, and—by Jove!—yes!—the dear old Wimblehurst air-pump
still! It gave me quite a little thrill—that air-pump! And beside it
was the electrical machine—but something—some serious trouble—had
happened to that. All these were evidently placed on a shelf just at
the level to show.

“Come right into the sanctum,” said my uncle, after he had finished
something about “esteemed consideration,” and whisked me through the
door into a room that quite amazingly failed to verify the promise of
that apparatus. It was papered with dingy wall-paper that had peeled in
places; it contained a fireplace, an easy-chair with a cushion, a table
on which stood two or three big bottles, a number of cigar-boxes on the
mantel, whisky Tantalus and a row of soda syphons. He shut the door
after me carefully.

“Well, here we are!” he said. “Going strong! Have a whisky, George?
No!—Wise man! Neither will I! You see me at it! At it—hard!”

“Hard at what?”

“Read it,” and he thrust into my hand a label—that label that has now
become one of the most familiar objects of the chemist’s shop, the
greenish-blue rather old-fashioned bordering, the legend, the name in
good black type, very clear, and the strong man all set about with
lightning flashes above the double column of skilful lies in red—the
label of Tono-Bungay. “It’s afloat,” he said, as I stood puzzling at
this. “It’s afloat. I’m afloat!” And suddenly he burst out singing in
that throaty tenor of his—

“I’m afloat, I’m afloat on the fierce flowing tide,
The ocean’s my home and my bark is my bride!


“Ripping song that is, George. Not so much a bark as a solution, but
still—it does! Here we are at it! By-the-by! Half a mo’! I’ve thought
of a thing.” He whisked out, leaving me to examine this nuclear spot at
leisure while his voice became dictatorial without. The den struck me
as in its large grey dirty way quite unprecedented and extraordinary.
The bottles were all labelled simply A, B, C, and so forth, and that
dear old apparatus above, seen from this side, was even more patiently
“on the shelf” than when it had been used to impress Wimblehurst. I saw
nothing for it but to sit down in the chair and await my uncle’s
explanations. I remarked a frock-coat with satin lapels behind the
door; there was a dignified umbrella in the corner and a clothes-brush
and a hat-brush stood on a side-table. My uncle returned in five
minutes looking at his watch—a gold watch—“Gettin’ lunch-time, George,”
he said. “You’d better come and have lunch with me!”

“How’s Aunt Susan?” I asked.

“Exuberant. Never saw her so larky. This has bucked her up something
wonderful—all this.”

“All what?”

“Tono-Bungay.”

“What is Tono-Bungay?” I asked.

My uncle hesitated. “Tell you after lunch, George,” he said. “Come
along!” and having locked up the sanctum after himself, led the way
along a narrow dirty pavement, lined with barrows and swept at times by
avalanche-like porters bearing burthens to vans, to Farringdon Street.
He hailed a passing cab superbly, and the cabman was infinitely
respectful. “Schäfer’s,” he said, and off we went side by side—and with
me more and more amazed at all these things—to Schäfer’s Hotel, the
second of the two big places with huge lace curtain-covered windows,
near the corner of Blackfriars Bridge.

I will confess I felt a magic charm in our relative proportions as the
two colossal, pale-blue-and-red liveried porters of Schäfers’ held open
the inner doors for us with a respectful salutation that in some manner
they seemed to confine wholly to my uncle. Instead of being about four
inches taller, I felt at least the same size as he, and very much
slenderer. Still more respectful—waiters relieved him of the new hat
and the dignified umbrella, and took his orders for our lunch. He gave
them with a fine assurance.

He nodded to several of the waiters.

“They know me, George, already,” he said. “Point me out. Live place!
Eye for coming men!”

The detailed business of the lunch engaged our attention for a while,
