and then I leant across my plate. “And NOW?” said I.

“It’s the secret of vigour. Didn’t you read that label?”

“Yes, but—”

“It’s selling like hot cakes.”

“And what is it?” I pressed.

“Well,” said my uncle, and then leant forward and spoke softly under
cover of his hand, “It’s nothing more or less than...”

(But here an unfortunate scruple intervenes. After all, Tono-Bungay is
still a marketable commodity and in the hands of purchasers, who bought
it from—among other vendors—me. No! I am afraid I cannot give it away—)

“You see,” said my uncle in a slow confidential whisper, with eyes very
wide and a creased forehead, “it’s nice because of the” (here he
mentioned a flavouring matter and an aromatic spirit), “it’s
stimulating because of” (here he mentioned two very vivid tonics, one
with a marked action on the kidney.) “And the” (here he mentioned two
other ingredients) “makes it pretty intoxicating. Cocks their tails.
Then there’s” (but I touch on the essential secret.) “And there you
are. I got it out of an old book of recipes—all except the” (here he
mentioned the more virulent substance, the one that assails the
kidneys), “which is my idea! Modern touch! There you are!”

He reverted to the direction of our lunch.

Presently he was leading the way to the lounge—sumptuous piece in red
morocco and yellow glazed crockery, with incredible vistas of settees
and sofas and things, and there I found myself grouped with him in two
excessively upholstered chairs with an earthenware Moorish table
between us bearing coffee and Benedictine, and I was tasting the
delights of a tenpenny cigar. My uncle smoked a similar cigar in an
habituated manner, and he looked energetic and knowing and luxurious
and most unexpectedly a little bounder, round the end of it. It was
just a trivial flaw upon our swagger, perhaps that we both were clear
our cigars had to be “mild.” He got obliquely across the spaces of his
great armchair so as to incline confidentially to my ear, he curled up
his little legs, and I, in my longer way, adopted a corresponding
receptive obliquity. I felt that we should strike an unbiased observer
as a couple of very deep and wily and developing and repulsive persons.

“I want to let you into this”—puff—“George,” said my uncle round the
end of his cigar. “For many reasons.”

His voice grew lower and more cunning. He made explanations that to my
inexperience did not completely explain. I retain an impression of a
long credit and a share with a firm of wholesale chemists, of a credit
and a prospective share with some pirate printers, of a third share for
a leading magazine and newspaper proprietor.

“I played ’em off one against the other,” said my uncle. I took his
point in an instant. He had gone to each of them in turn and said the
others had come in.

“I put up four hundred pounds,” said my uncle, “myself and my all. And
you know—”

He assumed a brisk confidence. “I hadn’t five hundred pence. At least—”

For a moment he really was just a little embarrassed. “I _did_” he
said, “produce capital. You see, there was that trust affair of yours—I
ought, I suppose—in strict legality—to have put that straight first.
Zzzz....

“It was a bold thing to do,” said my uncle, shifting the venue from the
region of honour to the region of courage. And then with a
characteristic outburst of piety, “Thank God it’s all come right!

“And now, I suppose, you ask where do YOU come in? Well, fact is I’ve
always believed in you, George. You’ve got—it’s a sort of dismal grit.
Bark your shins, rouse you, and you’ll go! You’d rush any position you
had a mind to rush. I know a bit about character, George—trust me.
You’ve got—” He clenched his hands and thrust them out suddenly, and at
the same time said, with explosive violence, “Wooosh! Yes. You have!
The way you put away that Latin at Wimblehurst; I’ve never forgotten
it.

“Wo-oo-oo-osh! Your science and all that! Wo-oo-oo-osh! I know my
limitations. There’s things I can do, and” (he spoke in a whisper, as
though this was the first hint of his life’s secret) “there’s things I
can’t. Well, I can create this business, but I can’t make it go. I’m
too voluminous—I’m a boiler-over, not a simmering stick-at-it._You_
keep on _hotting up and hotting up_. Papin’s digester. That’s you,
steady and long and piling up,—then, wo-oo-oo-oo-osh. Come in and
stiffen these niggers. Teach them that wo-oo-oo-oo-osh. There you are!
That’s what I’m after. You! Nobody else believes you’re more than a
boy. Come right in with me and be a man. Eh, George? Think of the fun
of it—a thing on the go—a Real Live Thing! Wooshing it up! Making it
buzz and spin! Whoo-oo-oo.”—He made alluring expanding circles in the
air with his hand. “Eh?”

His proposal, sinking to confidential undertones again, took more
definite shape. I was to give all my time and energy to developing and
organising. “You shan’t write a single advertisement, or give a single
assurance” he declared. “I can do all that.” And the telegram was no
flourish; I was to have three hundred a year. Three hundred a year.
(“That’s nothing,” said my uncle, “the thing to freeze on to, when the
time comes, is your tenth of the vendor’s share.”)

Three hundred a year certain, anyhow! It was an enormous income to me.
For a moment I was altogether staggered. Could there be that much money
in the whole concern? I looked about me at the sumptuous furniture of
Schäfer’s Hotel. No doubt there were many such incomes.

My head was spinning with unwonted Benedictine and Burgundy.

“Let me go back and look at the game again,” I said. “Let me see
upstairs and round about.”

I did.

“What do you think of it all?” my uncle asked at last.

“Well, for one thing,” I said, “why don’t you have those girls working
in a decently ventilated room? Apart from any other consideration,
they’d work twice as briskly. And they ought to cover the corks before
labelling round the bottle.”

“Why?” said my uncle.

“Because—they sometimes make a mucker of the cork job, and then the
label’s wasted.”

“Come and change it, George,” said my uncle, with sudden fervour “Come
here and make a machine of it. You can. Make it all slick, and then
make it woosh. I know you can. Oh! I know you can.”

II

I seem to remember very quick changes of mind after that lunch. The
muzzy exaltation of the unaccustomed stimulants gave way very rapidly
to a model of pellucid and impartial clairvoyance which is one of my
habitual mental states. It is intermittent; it leaves me for weeks
together, I know, but back it comes at last like justice on circuit,
and calls up all my impression, all my illusions, all my willful and
passionate proceedings. We came downstairs again into that inner room
which pretended to be a scientific laboratory through its high glass
lights, and indeed was a lurking place. My uncle pressed a cigarette on
me, and I took it and stood before the empty fireplace while he propped
his umbrella in the corner, deposited the new silk hat that was a
little too big for him on the table, blew copiously and produced a
second cigar.

It came into my head that he had shrunken very much in size since the
Wimblehurst days, that the cannon ball he had swallowed was rather more
evident and shameless than it had been, his skin less fresh and the
nose between his glasses, which still didn’t quite fit, much redder.
And just then he seemed much laxer in his muscles and not quite as
alertly quick in his movements. But he evidently wasn’t aware of the
degenerative nature of his changes as he sat there, looking suddenly
quite little under my eyes.

“Well, George!” he said, quite happily unconscious of my silent
criticism, “what do you think of it all?”

“Well,” I said, “in the first place—it’s a damned swindle!”

“Tut! tut!” said my uncle. “It’s as straight as—It’s fair trading!”

“So much the worse for trading,” I said.

“It’s the sort of thing everybody does. After all, there’s no harm in
the stuff—and it may do good. It might do a lot of good—giving people
confidence, f’rinstance, against an epidemic. See? Why not? don’t see
where your swindle comes in.”

“H’m,” I said. “It’s a thing you either see or don’t see.”

“I’d like to know what sort of trading isn’t a swindle in its way.
Everybody who does a large advertised trade is selling something common
on the strength of saying it’s uncommon. Look at Chickson—they made him
a baronet. Look at Lord Radmore, who did it on lying about the alkali
in soap! Rippin’ ads those were of his too!”

“You don’t mean to say you think doing this stuff up in bottles and
swearing it’s the quintessence of strength and making poor devils buy
it at that, is straight?”

“Why not, George? How do we know it mayn’t be the quintessence to them
so far as they’re concerned?”

“Oh!” I said, and shrugged my shoulders.

“There’s Faith. You put Faith in ’em.... I grant our labels are a bit
emphatic. Christian Science, really. No good setting people against the
medicine. Tell me a solitary trade nowadays that hasn’t to be—emphatic.
It’s the modern way! Everybody understands it—everybody allows for it.”

“But the world would be no worse and rather better, if all this stuff
of yours was run down a conduit into the Thames.”

“Don’t see that, George, at all. ’Mong other things, all our people
would be out of work. Unemployed! I grant you Tono-Bungay _may_ be—not
_quite_ so good a find for the world as Peruvian bark, but the point
is, George—it _makes trade!_ And the world lives on trade. Commerce! A
romantic exchange of commodities and property. Romance. ’Magination.
See? You must look at these things in a broad light. Look at the
wood—and forget the trees! And hang it, George! we got to do these
things! There’s no way unless you do. What do _you_ mean to do—anyhow?”

“There’s ways of living,” I said, “Without either fraud or lying.”

“You’re a bit stiff, George. There’s no fraud in this affair, I’ll bet
my hat. But what do you propose to do? Go as chemist to some one who
_is_ running a business, and draw a salary without a share like I offer
you. Much sense in that! It comes out of the swindle as you call
it—just the same.”

“Some businesses are straight and quiet, anyhow; supply a sound article
that is really needed, don’t shout advertisements.”

“No, George. There you’re behind the times. The last of that sort was
sold up ‘bout five years ago.”

“Well, there’s scientific research.”

“And who pays for that? Who put up that big City and Guilds place at
South Kensington? Enterprising business men! They fancy they’ll have a
bit of science going on, they want a handy Expert ever and again, and
there you are! And what do you get for research when you’ve done it?
Just a bare living and no outlook. They just keep you to make
discoveries, and if they fancy they’ll use ’em they do.”

“One can teach.”

“How much a year, George? How much a year? I suppose you must respect
Carlyle! Well, you take Carlyle’s test—solvency. (Lord! what a book
that French Revolution of his is!) See what the world pays teachers and
discoverers and what it pays business men! That shows the ones it
really wants. There’s a justice in these big things, George, over and
above the apparent injustice. I tell you it wants trade. It’s Trade
that makes the world go round! Argosies! Venice! Empire!”

My uncle suddenly rose to his feet.

“You think it over, George. You think it over! And come up on Sunday to
the new place—we got rooms in Gower Street now—and see your aunt. She’s
often asked for you, George often and often, and thrown it up at me
about that bit of property—though I’ve always said and always will,
that twenty-five shillings in the pound is what I’ll pay you and
interest up to the nail. And think it over. It isn’t me I ask you to
help. It’s yourself. It’s your aunt Susan. It’s the whole concern. It’s
the commerce of your country. And we want you badly. I tell you
straight, I know my limitations. You could take this place, you could
make it go! I can see you at it—looking rather sour. Woosh is the word,
George.”

And he smiled endearingly.

“I got to dictate a letter,” he said, ending the smile, and vanished
into the outer room.

III

I didn’t succumb without a struggle to my uncle’s allurements. Indeed,
I held out for a week while I contemplated life and my prospects. It
was a crowded and muddled contemplation. It invaded even my sleep.

My interview with the Registrar, my talk with my uncle, my abrupt
discovery of the hopeless futility of my passion for Marion, had
combined to bring me to sense of crisis. What was I going to do with
life?

I remember certain phases of my indecisions very well.

I remember going home from our talk. I went down Farringdon Street to
the Embankment because I thought to go home by Holborn and Oxford
Street would be too crowded for thinking.... That piece of Embankment
from Blackfriars to Westminster still reminds me of that momentous
hesitation.

You know, from first to last, I saw the business with my eyes open, I
saw its ethical and moral values quite clearly. Never for a moment do I
remember myself faltering from my persuasion that the sale of
Tono-Bungay was a thoroughly dishonest proceeding. The stuff was, I
perceived, a mischievous trash, slightly stimulating, aromatic and
attractive, likely to become a bad habit and train people in the
habitual use of stronger tonics and insidiously dangerous to people
with defective kidneys. It would cost about sevenpence the large bottle
to make, including bottling, and we were to sell it at half a crown
plus the cost of the patent medicine stamp. A thing that I will confess
deterred me from the outset far more than the sense of dishonesty in
this affair, was the supreme silliness of the whole concern. I still
clung to the idea that the world of men was or should be a sane and
just organisation, and the idea that I should set myself gravely, just
at the fine springtime of my life, to developing a monstrous bottling
and packing warehouse, bottling rubbish for the consumption of foolish,
credulous and depressed people, had in it a touch of insanity. My early
beliefs still clung to me. I felt assured that somewhere there must be
a hitch in the fine prospect of ease and wealth under such conditions;
that somewhere, a little overgrown, perhaps, but still traceable, lay a
neglected, wasted path of use and honour for me.

My inclination to refuse the whole thing increased rather than
diminished at first as I went along the Embankment. In my uncle’s
presence there had been a sort of glamour that had prevented an
outright refusal. It was a revival of affection for him I felt in his
presence, I think, in part, and in part an instinctive feeling that I
must consider him as my host. But much more was it a curious persuasion
he had the knack of inspiring—a persuasion not so much of his integrity
and capacity as of the reciprocal and yielding foolishness of the
world. One felt that he was silly and wild, but in some way silly and
wild after the fashion of the universe. After all, one must live
somehow. I astonished him and myself by temporising.

“No,” said I, “I’ll think it over!”

And as I went along the embankment the first effect was all against my
uncle. He shrank—for a little while he continued to shrink—in
perspective until he was only a very small shabby little man in a dirty
back street, sending off a few hundred bottles of rubbish to foolish
buyers. The great buildings on the right of us, the Inns and the School
Board place—as it was then—Somerset House, the big hotels, the great
bridges, Westminster’s outlines ahead, had an effect of grey largeness
that reduced him to the proportions of a busy black beetle in a crack
in the floor.

And then my eye caught the advertisements on the south side of
“Sorber’s Food,” of “Cracknell’s Ferric Wine,” very bright and
prosperous signs, illuminated at night, and I realised how
astonishingly they looked at home there, how evidently part they were
in the whole thing.

I saw a man come charging out of Palace Yard—the policeman touched his
helmet to him—with a hat and a bearing astonishingly like my uncle’s.
After all,—didn’t Cracknell himself sit in the House?

Tono-Bungay shouted at me from a hoarding near Adelphi Terrace; I saw
it afar off near Carfax Street; it cried out again upon me in
Kensington High Street, and burst into a perfect clamour; six or seven
times I saw it as I drew near my diggings. It certainly had an air of
being something more than a dream.

Yes, I thought it over—thoroughly enough.... Trade rules the world.
Wealth rather than trade! The thing was true, and true too was my
uncle’s proposition that the quickest way to get wealth is to sell the
cheapest thing possible in the dearest bottle. He was frightfully right
after all. _Pecunia non olet_,—a Roman emperor said that. Perhaps my
great heroes in Plutarch were no more than such men, fine now only
because they are distant; perhaps after all this Socialism to which I
had been drawn was only a foolish dream, only the more foolish because
all its promises were conditionally true. Morris and these others
played with it wittingly; it gave a zest, a touch of substance, to
their aesthetic pleasures. Never would there be good faith enough to
bring such things about. They knew it; every one, except a few young
fools, knew it. As I crossed the corner of St. James’s Park wrapped in
thought, I dodged back just in time to escape a prancing pair of greys.
A stout, common-looking woman, very magnificently dressed, regarded me
from the carriage with a scornful eye. “No doubt,” thought I, “a
pill-vendor’s wife....”

Running through all my thoughts, surging out like a refrain, was my
uncle’s master-stroke, his admirable touch of praise: “Make it all
slick—and then make it go Woosh. I know you can! Oh! I _know_ you can!”

IV

Ewart as a moral influence was unsatisfactory. I had made up my mind to
put the whole thing before him, partly to see how he took it, and
partly to hear how it sounded when it was said. I asked him to come and
eat with me in an Italian place near Panton Street where one could get
a curious, interesting, glutting sort of dinner for eighteen-pence. He
came with a disconcerting black-eye that he wouldn’t explain. “Not so
much a black-eye,” he said, “as the aftermath of a purple patch....
What’s your difficulty?”

“I’ll tell you with the salad,” I said.

But as a matter of fact I didn’t tell him. I threw out that I was
doubtful whether I ought to go into trade, or stick to teaching in view
of my deepening socialist proclivities; and he, warming with the
unaccustomed generosity of a sixteen-penny Chianti, ran on from that
without any further inquiry as to my trouble.

His utterances roved wide and loose.

“The reality of life, my dear Ponderevo,” I remember him saying very
impressively and punctuating with the nut-crackers as he spoke, “is
Chromatic Conflict ... and Form. Get hold of that and let all these
other questions go. The Socialist will tell you one sort of colour and
shape is right, the Individualist another. What does it all amount to?
What _does_ it all amount to? _Nothing!_ I have no advice to give
anyone,—except to avoid regrets. Be yourself, seek after such beautiful
things as your own sense determines to be beautiful. And don’t mind the
headache in the morning.... For what, after all, is a morning,
Ponderevo? It isn’t like the upper part of a day!”

He paused impressively.

“What Rot!” I cried, after a confused attempt to apprehend him.

“Isn’t it! And it’s my bedrock wisdom in the matter! Take it or leave
it, my dear George; take it or leave it.”... He put down the
nut-crackers out of my reach and lugged a greasy-looking note-book from
his pocket. “I’m going to steal this mustard pot,” he said.

I made noises of remonstrance.

“Only as a matter of design. I’ve got to do an old beast’s tomb.

“Wholesale grocer. I’ll put it on his corners,—four mustard pots. I
dare say he’d be glad of a mustard plaster now to cool him, poor devil,
where he is. But anyhow,—here goes!”

V

It came to me in the small hours that the real moral touchstone for
this great doubting of mind was Marion. I lay composing statements of
my problem and imagined myself delivering them to her—and she,
goddess-like and beautiful; giving her fine, simply-worded judgment.

“You see, it’s just to give one’s self over to the Capitalistic
System,” I imagined myself saying in good Socialist jargon; “it’s
surrendering all one’s beliefs. We _may_ succeed, we _may_ grow rich,
but where would the satisfaction be?”

Then she would say, “No! That wouldn’t be right.”

“But the alternative is to wait!”

Then suddenly she would become a goddess. She would turn upon me
frankly and nobly, with shining eyes, with arms held out. “No,” she
would say, “we love one another. Nothing ignoble shall ever touch us.
We love one another. Why wait to tell each other that, dear? What does
it matter that we are poor and may keep poor?”

But indeed the conversation didn’t go at all in that direction. At the
sight of her my nocturnal eloquence became preposterous and all the
moral values altered altogether. I had waited for her outside the door
of the Parsian-robe establishment in Kensington High Street and walked
home with her thence. I remember how she emerged into the warm evening
light and that she wore a brown straw hat that made her, for once not
only beautiful but pretty.

“I like that hat,” I said by way of opening; and she smiled her rare
delightful smile at me.

“I love you,” I said in an undertone, as we jostled closer on the
pavement.

She shook her head forbiddingly, but she still smiled. Then—“Be
sensible!”

The High Street pavement is too narrow and crowded for conversation and
we were some way westward before we spoke again.

“Look here,” I said; “I want you, Marion. Don’t you understand? I want
you.”

“Now!” she cried warningly.

I do not know if the reader will understand how a passionate lover, an
immense admiration and desire, can be shot with a gleam of positive
hatred. Such a gleam there was in me at the serene self-complacency of
that “_Now!_” It vanished almost before I felt it. I found no warning
in it of the antagonisms latent between us.

“Marion,” I said, “this isn’t a trifling matter to me. I love you; I
would die to get you.... Don’t you care?”

“But what is the good?”

“You don’t care,” I cried. “You don’t care a rap!”

“You know I care,” she answered. “If I didn’t—If I didn’t like you very
much, should I let you come and meet me—go about with you?”

“Well then,” I said, “promise to marry me!”

“If I do, what difference will it make?”

We were separated by two men carrying a ladder who drove between us
unawares.

“Marion,” I asked when we got together again, “I tell you I want you to
marry me.”

“We can’t.”

“Why not?”

“We can’t marry—in the street.”

“We could take our chance!”

“I wish you wouldn’t go on talking like this. What is the good?”

She suddenly gave way to gloom. “It’s no good marrying” she said.
“One’s only miserable. I’ve seen other girls. When one’s alone one has
a little pocket-money anyhow, one can go about a little. But think of
being married and no money, and perhaps children—you can’t be sure....”

She poured out this concentrated philosophy of her class and type in
jerky uncompleted sentences, with knitted brows, with discontented eyes
towards the westward glow—forgetful, it seemed, for a moment even of
me.

“Look here, Marion,” I said abruptly, “what would you marry on?”

“What _is_ the good?” she began.

“Would you marry on three hundred a year?”

She looked at me for a moment. “That’s six pounds a week,” she said.
“One could manage on that, easily. Smithie’s brother—No, he only gets
two hundred and fifty. He married a typewriting girl.”

“Will you marry me if I get three hundred a year?”

She looked at me again, with a curious gleam of hope.

“_If!_” she said.

I held out my hand and looked her in the eyes. “It’s a bargain,” I
said.

She hesitated and touched my hand for an instant. “It’s silly,” she
remarked as she did so. “It means really we’re—” She paused.

