“What?” said I.

“Produce a little half-brother for Bladesover. So it went to the
Phillbrick gang. And they let it! And I and my step-mother—we let, too.
And live in a little house.”

She nodded her head vaguely over her shoulder and turned to me again.
“Well, suppose it was an accident. Here you are! Now you’re here, what
are you going to do? You’re young. Is it to be Parliament? heard some
men the other day talking about you. Before I knew you were you. They
said that was what you ought to do.”...

She put me through my intentions with a close and vital curiosity. It
was just as she had tried to imagine me a soldier and place me years
ago. She made me feel more planless and incidental than ever. “You want
to make a flying-machine,” she pursued, “and when you fly? What then?
Would it be for fighting?”

I told her something of my experimental work. She had never heard of
the soaring aeroplane, and was excited by the thought, and keen to hear
about it. She had thought all the work so far had been a mere
projecting of impossible machines. For her Pilcher and Lilienthal had
died in vain. She did not know such men had lived in the world.

“But that’s dangerous!” she said, with a note of discovery.

“Oh!—it’s dangerous.”

“Bee-atrice!” Lady Osprey called.

Beatrice dropped from the wall to her feet.

“Where do you do this soaring?”

“Beyond the high Barrows. East of Crest Hill and the wood.”

“Do you mind people coming to see?”

“Whenever you please. Only let me know”

“I’ll take my chance some day. Some day soon.” She looked at me
thoughtfully, smiled, and our talk was at an end.

IV

All my later work in aeronautics is associated in my memory with the
quality of Beatrice, with her incidental presence, with things she said
and did and things I thought of that had reference to her.

In the spring of that year I had got to a flying machine that lacked
nothing but longitudinal stability. My model flew like a bird for fifty
or a hundred yards or so, and then either dived and broke its nose or,
what was commoner, reared up, slid back and smashed its propeller. The
rhythm of the pitching puzzled me. I felt it must obey some laws not
yet quite clearly stated. I became therefore a student of theory and
literature for a time; I hit upon the string of considerations that led
me to what is called Ponderevo’s Principle and my F.R.S., and I worked
this out in three long papers. Meanwhile I made a lot of turn-table and
glider models and started in upon an idea of combining gas-bags and
gliders. Balloon work was new to me. I had made one or two ascents in
the balloons of the Aëro Club before I started my gasometer and the
balloon shed and gave Cothope a couple of months with Sir Peter
Rumchase. My uncle found part of the money for these developments; he
was growing interested and competitive in this business because of Lord
Boom’s prize and the amount of _réclame_ involved, and it was at his
request that I named my first navigable balloon Lord Roberts Alpha.

Lord Roberts A very nearly terminated all my investigations. My idea
both in this and its more successful and famous younger brother, Lord
Roberts β, was to utilise the idea of a contractile balloon with a
rigid flat base, a balloon shaped rather like an inverted boat that
should almost support the apparatus, but not quite. The gas-bag was of
the chambered sort used for these long forms, and not with an internal
balloonette. The trouble was to make the thing contractile. This I
sought to do by fixing a long, fine-meshed silk net over it that was
fastened to be rolled up on two longitudinal rods. Practically I
contracted my sausage gas-bag by netting it down. The ends were too
complex for me to describe here, but I thought them out elaborately and
they were very carefully planned. Lord Roberts A was furnished with a
single big screw forward, and there was a rudder aft. The engine was
the first one to be, so to speak, right in the plane of the gas-bag. I
lay immediately under the balloon on a sort of glider framework, far
away from either engine or rudder, controlling them by wire-pulls
constructed on the principle of the well-known Bowden brake of the
cyclist.

But Lord Roberts A has been pretty exhaustively figured and described
in various aeronautical publications. The unforeseen defect was the
badness of the work in the silk netting. It tore aft as soon as I began
to contract the balloon, and the last two segments immediately bulged
through the hole, exactly as an inner tube will bulge through the
ruptured outer cover of a pneumatic tire, and then the sharp edge of
the torn net cut the oiled-silk of the distended last segment along a
weak seam and burst it with a loud report.

Up to that point the whole thing had been going on extremely well. As a
navigable balloon and before I contracted it, the Lord Roberts A was an
unqualified success. It had run out of the shed admirably at nine or
ten miles an hour or more, and although there was a gentle southwester
blowing, it had gone up and turned and faced it as well as any craft of
the sort I have ever seen.

I lay in my customary glider position, horizontal and face downward,
and the invisibility of all the machinery gave an extraordinary effect
of independent levitation. Only by looking up, as it were, and turning
my head back could I see the flat aeroplane bottom of the balloon and
the rapid successive passages, swish, swish, swish of the vans of the
propeller. I made a wide circle over Lady Grove and Duffield and out
towards Effingham and came back quite successfully to the
starting-point.

Down below in the October sunlight were my sheds and the little group
that had been summoned to witness the start, their faces craned upward
and most of them scrutinising my expression through field-glasses. I
could see Carnaby and Beatrice on horseback, and two girls I did not
know with them; Cothope and three or four workmen I employed; my aunt
and Mrs. Levinstein, who was staying with her, on foot, and Dimmock,
the veterinary surgeon, and one or two others. My shadow moved a little
to the north of them like the shadow of a fish. At Lady Grove the
servants were out on the lawn, and the Duffield school playground
swarmed with children too indifferent to aeronautics to cease their
playing. But in the Crest Hill direction—the place looked
extraordinarily squat and ugly from above—there were knots and strings
of staring workmen everywhere—not one of them working, but all agape.
(But now I write it, it occurs to me that perhaps it was their dinner
hour; it was certainly near twelve.) I hung for a moment or so enjoying
the soar, then turned about to face a clear stretch of open down, let
the engine out to full speed and set my rollers at work rolling in the
net, and so tightening the gas-bags. Instantly the pace quickened with
the diminished resistance...

In that moment before the bang I think I must have been really flying.
Before the net ripped, just in the instant when my balloon was at its
systole, the whole apparatus was, I am convinced, heavier than air.
That, however, is a claim that has been disputed, and in any case this
sort of priority is a very trivial thing.

Then came a sudden retardation, instantly followed by an inexpressibly
disconcerting tilt downward of the machine. That I still recall with
horror. I couldn’t see what was happening at all and I couldn’t
imagine. It was a mysterious, inexplicable dive. The thing, it seemed,
without rhyme or reason, was kicking up its heels in the air. The bang
followed immediately, and I perceived I was falling rapidly.

I was too much taken by surprise to think of the proper cause of the
report. I don’t even know what I made of it. I was obsessed, I suppose,
by that perpetual dread of the modern aeronaut, a flash between engine
and balloon. Yet obviously I wasn’t wrapped in flames. I ought to have
realised instantly it wasn’t that. I did, at any rate, whatever other
impressions there were, release the winding of the outer net and let
the balloon expand again, and that no doubt did something to break my
fall. I don’t remember doing that. Indeed, all I do remember is the
giddy effect upon the landscape of falling swiftly upon it down a flat
spiral, the hurried rush of fields and trees and cottages on my left
shoulder and the overhung feeling as if the whole apparatus was
pressing down the top of my head. I didn’t stop or attempt to stop the
screw. That was going on, swish, swish, swish all the time.

Cothope really knows more about the fall than I do. He describes the
easterly start, the tilt, and the appearance and bursting of a sort of
bladder aft. Then down I swooped, very swiftly, but not nearly so
steeply as I imagined I was doing. “Fifteen or twenty degrees,” said
Cothope, “to be exact.” From him it was that I learnt that I let the
nets loose again, and so arrested my fall. He thinks I was more in
control of myself than I remember.

But I do not see why I should have forgotten so excellent a resolution.
His impression is that I was really steering and trying to drop into
the Farthing Down beeches. “You hit the trees,” he said, “and the whole
affair stood on its nose among them, and then very slowly crumpled up.
I saw you’d been jerked out, as I thought, and I didn’t stay for more.
I rushed for my bicycle.”

As a matter of fact, it was purely accidental that I came down in the
woods. I am reasonably certain that I had no more control then than a
thing in a parcel. I remember I felt a sort of wincing, “Now it comes!”
as the trees rushed up to me. If I remember that, I should remember
steering. Then the propeller smashed, everything stopped with a jerk,
and I was falling into a mass of yellowing leaves, and Lord Roberts A,
so it seemed to me, was going back into the sky.

I felt twigs and things hit me in the face, but I didn’t feel injured
at the time; I clutched at things that broke, tumbled through a froth
of green and yellow into a shadowy world of great bark-covered arms,
and there, snatching wildly, got a grip on a fair round branch, and
hung.

I became intensely alert and clear-headed. I held by that branch for a
moment and then looked about me, and caught at another, and then found
myself holding to a practicable fork. I swung forward to that and got a
leg around it below its junction, and so was able presently to clamber
down, climbing very coolly and deliberately. I dropped ten feet or so
from the lowest branch and fell on my feet. “That’s all right,” I said,
and stared up through the tree to see what I could of the deflated and
crumpled remains that had once been Lord Roberts A festooned on the
branches it had broken. “Gods!” I said, “what a tumble!”

I wiped something that trickled from my face and was shocked to see my
hand covered with blood. I looked at myself and saw what seemed to me
an astonishing quantity of blood running down my arm and shoulder. I
perceived my mouth was full of blood. It’s a queer moment when one
realises one is hurt, and perhaps badly hurt, and has still to discover
just how far one is hurt. I explored my face carefully and found
unfamiliar contours on the left side. The broken end of a branch had
driven right through my cheek, damaging my cheek and teeth and gums,
and left a splinter of itself stuck, like an explorer’s
fartherest-point flag, in the upper maxillary. That and a sprained
wrist were all my damage. But I bled as though I had been chopped to
pieces, and it seemed to me that my face had been driven in. I can’t
describe just the horrible disgust I felt at that.

“This blood must be stopped, anyhow,” I said, thickheadedly.

“I wonder where there’s a spider’s web”—an odd twist for my mind to
take. But it was the only treatment that occurred to me.

I must have conceived some idea of going home unaided, because I was
thirty yards from the tree before I dropped.

Then a kind of black disc appeared in the middle of the world and
rushed out to the edge of things and blotted them out. I don’t remember
falling down. I fainted from excitement, disgust at my injury and loss
of blood, and lay there until Cothope found me.

He was the first to find me, scorching as he did over the downland
turf, and making a wide course to get the Carnaby plantations at their
narrowest. Then presently, while he was trying to apply the methodical
teachings of the St. John’s Ambulance classes to a rather abnormal
case, Beatrice came galloping through the trees full-tilt, with Lord
Carnaby hard behind her, and she was hatless, muddy from a fall, and
white as death. “And cool as a cucumber, too,” said Cothope, turning it
over in his mind as he told me.

(“They never seem quite to have their heads, and never seem quite to
lose ’em,” said Cothope, generalising about the sex.)

Also he witnessed she acted with remarkable decision. The question was
whether I should be taken to the house her step-mother occupied at
Bedley Corner, the Carnaby dower house, or down to Carnaby’s place at
Easting. Beatrice had no doubt in the matter, for she meant to nurse
me. Carnaby didn’t seem to want that to happen. “She _would_ have it
wasn’t half so far,” said Cothope. “She faced us out....

“I hate to be faced out of my opinion, so I’ve taken a pedometer over
it since. It’s exactly forty-three yards further.

“Lord Carnaby looked at her pretty straight,” said Cothope, finishing
the picture; “and then he give in.”

V

But my story has made a jump from June to October, and during that time
my relations with Beatrice and the countryside that was her setting had
developed in many directions. She came and went, moving in an orbit for
which I had no data, going to London and Paris, into Wales and
Northampton, while her stepmother, on some independent system of her
own, also vanished and recurred intermittently. At home they obeyed the
rule of an inflexible old maid, Charlotte, and Beatrice exercised all
the rights of proprietorship in Carnaby’s extensive stables. Her
interest in me was from the first undisguised. She found her way to my
worksheds and developed rapidly, in spite of the sincere discouragement
of Cothope, into a keen amateur of aeronautics. She would come
sometimes in the morning, sometimes in the afternoon, sometimes afoot
with an Irish terrier, sometimes riding. She would come for three or
four days every day, vanish for a fortnight or three weeks, return.

It was not long before I came to look for her. From the first I found
her immensely interesting. To me she was a new feminine type
altogether—I have made it plain, I think, how limited was my knowledge
of women. But she made me not simply interested in her, but in myself.
She became for me something that greatly changes a man’s world. How
shall I put it? She became an audience. Since I’ve emerged from the
emotional developments of the affair I have thought it out in a hundred
aspects, and it does seem to me that this way in which men and women
make audiences for one another is a curiously influential force in
their lives. For some it seems an audience is a vital necessity, they
seek audiences as creatures seek food; others again, my uncle among
them, can play to an imaginary audience. I, I think, have lived and can
live without one. In my adolescence I was my own audience and my own
court of honour. And to have an audience in one’s mind is to play a
part, to become self-conscious and dramatic. For many years I had been
self-forgetful and scientific. I had lived for work and impersonal
interests until I found scrutiny, applause and expectation in
Beatrice’s eyes. Then I began to live for the effect I imagined I made
upon her, to make that very soon the principal value in my life. I
played to her. I did things for the look of them. I began to dream more
and more of beautiful situations and fine poses and groupings with her
and for her.

I put these things down because they puzzle me. I think I was in love
with Beatrice, as being in love is usually understood; but it was quite
a different state altogether from my passionate hunger for Marion, or
my keen, sensuous desire for and pleasure in Effie. These were selfish,
sincere things, fundamental and instinctive, as sincere as the leap of
a tiger. But until matters drew to a crisis with Beatrice, there was an
immense imaginative insurgence of a quite different quality. I am
setting down here very gravely, and perhaps absurdly, what are no doubt
elementary commonplaces for innumerable people. This love that grew up
between Beatrice and myself was, I think—I put it quite tentatively and
rather curiously—romantic love. That unfortunate and truncated affair
of my uncle and the Scrymgeour lady was really of the same stuff, if a
little different in quality. I have to admit that. The factor of
audience was of primary importance in either else.

Its effect upon me was to make me in many respects adolescent again. It
made me keener upon the point of honour, and anxious and eager to do
high and splendid things, and in particular, brave things. So far it
ennobled and upheld me. But it did also push me towards vulgar and
showy things. At bottom it was disingenuous; it gave my life the
quality of stage scenery, with one side to the audience, another side
that wasn’t meant to show, and an economy of substance. It certainly
robbed my work of high patience and quality. I cut down the toil of
research in my eagerness and her eagerness for fine flourishes in the
air, flights that would tell. I shirked the longer road.

And it robbed me, too, of any fine perception of absurdity.

Yet that was not everything in our relationship. The elemental thing
was there also. It came in very suddenly.

It was one day in the summer, though I do not now recall without
reference to my experimental memoranda whether it was in July or
August. I was working with a new and more bird-like aeroplane with wing
curvatures studied from Lilienthal, Pilcher and Phillips, that I
thought would give a different rhythm for the pitching oscillations
than anything I’d had before. I was soaring my long course from the
framework on the old barrow by my sheds down to Tinker’s Corner. It is
a clear stretch of downland, except for two or three thickets of box
and thorn to the right of my course; one transverse trough, in which
there is bush and a small rabbit warren, comes in from the east. I had
started, and was very intent on the peculiar long swoop with which any
new arrangement flew. Then, without any sort of notice, right ahead of
me appeared Beatrice, riding towards Tinker’s Corner to waylay and talk
to me. She looked round over her shoulder, saw me coming, touched her
horse to a gallop, and then the brute bolted right into the path of my
machine.

There was a queer moment of doubt whether we shouldn’t all smash
together. I had to make up my mind very quickly whether I would
pitch-up and drop backward at once and take my chance of falling
undamaged—a poor chance it would have been—in order to avoid any risk
to her, or whether I would lift against the wind and soar right over
her. This latter I did. She had already got her horse in hand when I
came up to her. Her woman’s body lay along his neck, and she glanced up
as I, with wings aspread, and every nerve in a state of tension, swept
over her.

Then I had landed, and was going back to where her horse stood still
and trembling.

We exchanged no greetings. She slid from her saddle into my arms, and
for one instant I held her.

“Those great wings,” she said, and that was all.

She lay in my arms, and I thought for a moment she had fainted.

“Very near a nasty accident,” said Cothope, coming up and regarding our
grouping with disfavour. He took her horse by the bridle. “Very
dangerous thing coming across us like that.”

Beatrice disengaged herself from me, stood for a moment trembling, and
then sat down on the turf “I’ll just sit down for a moment,” she said.

“Oh!” she said.

She covered her face with her hands, while Cothope looked at her with
an expression between suspicion and impatience.

For some moments nobody moved. Then Cothope remarked that perhaps he’d
better get her water.

As for me, I was filled with a new outrageous idea, begotten I scarcely
know how from this incident, with its instant contacts and swift
emotions, and that was that I must make love to and possess Beatrice. I
see no particular reason why that thought should have come to me in
that moment, but it did. I do not believe that before then I had
thought of our relations in such terms at all. Suddenly, as I remember
it, the factor of passion came. She crouched there, and I stood over
her, and neither of us said a word. But it was just as though something
had been shouted from the sky.

Cothope had gone twenty paces perhaps when she uncovered her face. “I
shan’t want any water,” she said. “Call him back.”

VI

After that the spirit of our relations changed. The old ease had gone.
She came to me less frequently, and when she came she would have some
one with her, usually old Carnaby, and he would do the bulk of the
talking. All through September she was away. When we were alone
together there was a curious constraint. We became clouds of
inexpressible feeling towards one another; we could think of nothing
that was not too momentous for words.

Then came the smash of Lord Roberts A, and I found myself with a
bandaged face in a bedroom in the Bedley Corner dower-house with
Beatrice presiding over an inefficient nurse, Lady Osprey very pink and
shocked in the background, and my aunt jealously intervening.

My injuries were much more showy than serious, and I could have been
taken to Lady Grove next day, but Beatrice would not permit that, and
kept me at Bedley Corner three clear days. In the afternoon of the
second day she became extremely solicitous for the proper aeration of
the nurse, packed her off for an hour in a brisk rain, and sat by me
alone.

I asked her to marry me.

All the whole I must admit it was not a situation that lent itself to
eloquence. I lay on my back and talked through bandages, and with some
little difficulty, for my tongue and mouth had swollen. But I was
feverish and in pain, and the emotional suspense I had been in so long
with regard to her became now an unendurable impatience.

“Comfortable?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“Shall I read to you?”

“No. I want to talk.”

“You can’t. I’d better talk to you.”

“No,” I said, “I want to talk to you.”

She came and stood by my bedside and looked me in the eyes. “I don’t—I
don’t want you to talk to me,” she said. “I thought you couldn’t talk.”

“I get few chances—of you.”

“You’d better not talk. Don’t talk now. Let me chatter instead. You
ought not to talk.”

“It isn’t much,” I said.

“I’d rather you didn’t.”

“I’m not going to be disfigured,” I said. “Only a scar.”

“Oh!” she said, as if she had expected something quite different. “Did
you think you’d become a sort of gargoyle?”

“L’Homme qui Rit!—I didn’t know. But that’s all right. Jolly flowers
those are!”

“Michaelmas daisies,” she said. “I’m glad you’r not disfigured, and
those are perennial sunflowers. Do you know no flowers at all? When I
saw you on the ground I certainly thought you were dead. You ought to
have been, by all the rules of the game.”

She said some other things, but I was thinking of my next move.

“Are we social equals?” I said abruptly.

She stared at me. “Queer question,” she said.

“But are we?”

“H’m. Difficult to say. But why do you ask? Is the daughter of a
courtesy Baron who died—of general disreputableness, I believe—before
his father—? I give it up. Does it matter?”

“No. My mind is confused. I want to know if you will marry me.”

She whitened and said nothing. I suddenly felt I must plead with her.
“Damn these bandages!” I said, breaking into ineffectual febrile rage.

She roused herself to her duties as nurse. “What are you doing? Why are
you trying to sit up? Sit down! Don’t touch your bandages. I told you
not to talk.”

She stood helpless for a moment, then took me firmly by the shoulders
and pushed me back upon the pillow. She gripped the wrist of the hand I
had raised to my face.

“I told you not to talk,” she whispered close to my face. “I asked you
not to talk. Why couldn’t you do as I asked you?”

“You’ve been avoiding me for a month,” I said.

“I know. You might have known. Put your hand back—down by your side.”

I obeyed. She sat on the edge of the bed. A flush had come to her
cheeks, and her eyes were very bright. “I asked you,” she repeated,
“not to talk.”

My eyes questioned her mutely.

She put her hand on my chest. Her eyes were tormented.

“How can I answer you now?” she said.

“How can I say anything now?”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

She made no answer.

“Do you mean it must be ‘No’?”

She nodded.

“But” I said, and my whole soul was full of accusations.

“I know,” she said. “I can’t explain. I can’t. But it has to be ‘No!’
It can’t be. It’s utterly, finally, for ever impossible.... Keep your
hands still!”

“But,” I said, “when we met again—”

“I can’t marry. I can’t and won’t.”

She stood up. “Why did you talk?” she cried, “couldn’t you _see?_”

She seemed to have something it was impossible to say.

She came to the table beside my bed and pulled the Michaelmas daisies
awry. “Why did you talk like that?” she said in a tone of infinite
bitterness. “To begin like that!”

“But what is it?” I said. “Is it some circumstance—my social position?”

“Oh, _damn_ your social position!” she cried.

She went and stood at the further window, staring out at the rain. For
a long time we were absolutely still. The wind and rain came in little
gusts upon the pane. She turned to me abruptly.

“You didn’t ask me if I loved you,” she said.

