“Oh, if it’s _that!_” said I.

“It’s not that,” she said. “But if you want to know—” She paused.

“I do,” she said.

We stared at one another.

“I do—with all my heart, if you want to know.”

“Then, why the devil—?” I asked.

She made no answer. She walked across the room to the piano and began
to play, rather noisily and rapidly, with odd gusts of emphasis, the
shepherd’s pipe music from the last act in “Tristan and Isolde.”
Presently she missed a note, failed again, ran her finger heavily up
the scale, struck the piano passionately with her fist, making a feeble
jar in the treble, jumped up, and went out of the room....

The nurse found me still wearing my helmet of bandages, partially
dressed, and pottering round the room to find the rest of my clothes. I
was in a state of exasperated hunger for Beatrice, and I was too
inflamed and weakened to conceal the state of my mind. I was feebly
angry because of the irritation of dressing, and particularly of the
struggle to put on my trousers without being able to see my legs. I was
staggering about, and once I had fallen over a chair and I had upset
the jar of Michaelmas daisies.

I must have been a detestable spectacle. “I’ll go back to bed,” said I,
“if I may have a word with Miss Beatrice. I’ve got something to say to
her. That’s why I’m dressing.”

My point was conceded, but there were long delays. Whether the
household had my ultimatum or whether she told Beatrice directly I do
not know, and what Lady Osprey can have made of it in the former case I
don’t imagine.

At last Beatrice came and stood by my bedside. “Well?” she said.

“All I want to say,” I said with the querulous note of a misunderstood
child, “is that I can’t take this as final. I want to see you and talk
when I’m better, and write. I can’t do anything now. I can’t argue.”

I was overtaken with self-pity and began to snivel, “I can’t rest. You
see? I can’t do anything.”

She sat down beside me again and spoke softly. “I promise I will talk
it all over with you again. When you are well. I promise I will meet
you somewhere so that we can talk. You can’t talk now.

“I asked you not to talk now. All you want to know you shall know...
Will that do?”

“I’d like to know”

She looked round to see the door was closed, stood up and went to it.

Then she crouched beside me and began whispering very softly and
rapidly with her face close to me.

“Dear,” she said, “I love you. If it will make you happy to marry me, I
will marry you. I was in a mood just now—a stupid, inconsiderate mood.
Of course I will marry you. You are my prince, my king. Women are such
things of mood—or I would have behaved differently. We say ‘No’ when we
mean ‘Yes’—and fly into crises. So now, Yes—yes—yes. I will. I can’t
even kiss you. Give me your hand to kiss that. Understand, I am yours.
Do you understand? I am yours just as if we had been married fifty
years. Your wife—Beatrice. Is that enough? Now—now will you rest?”

“Yes,” I said, “but why?”

“There are complications. There are difficulties. When you are better
you will be able to—understand them. But now they don’t matter. Only
you know this must be secret—for a time. Absolutely secret between us.
Will you promise that?”

“Yes,” I said, “I understand. I wish I could kiss you.”

She laid her head down beside mine for a moment and then she kissed my
hand.

“I don’t care what difficulties there are,” I said, and I shut my eyes.

VII

But I was only beginning to gauge the unaccountable elements in
Beatrice. For a week after my return to Lady Grove I had no sign of
her, and then she called with Lady Osprey and brought a huge bunch of
perennial sunflowers and Michaelmas daisies, “just the old flowers
there were in your room,” said my aunt, with a relentless eye on me. I
didn’t get any talk alone with Beatrice then, and she took occasion to
tell us she was going to London for some indefinite number of weeks. I
couldn’t even pledge her to write to me, and when she did it was a
brief, enigmatical, friendly letter with not a word of the reality
between us.

I wrote back a love letter—my first love letter—and she made no reply
for eight days. Then came a scrawl: “I can’t write letters. Wait till
we can talk. Are you better?”

I think the reader would be amused if he could see the papers on my
desk as I write all this, the mangled and disfigured pages, the
experimental arrangements of notes, the sheets of suggestions balanced
in constellations, the blottesque intellectual battlegrounds over which
I have been fighting. I find this account of my relations to Beatrice
quite the most difficult part of my story to write. I happen to be a
very objective-minded person, I forget my moods, and this was so much
an affair of moods. And even such moods and emotions as I recall are
very difficult to convey. To me it is about as difficult as describing
a taste or a scent.

Then the objective story is made up of little things that are difficult
to set in a proper order. And love in an hysterical passion, now high,
now low, now exalted, and now intensely physical. No one has ever yet
dared to tell a love story completely, its alternations, its comings
and goings, its debased moments, its hate. The love stories we tell,
tell only the net consequence, the ruling effect....

How can I rescue from the past now the mystical quality of Beatrice; my
intense longing for her; the overwhelming, irrational, formless desire?
How can I explain how intimately that worship mingled with a high,
impatient resolve to make her mine, to take her by strength and
courage, to do my loving in a violent heroic manner? And then the
doubts, the puzzled arrest at the fact of her fluctuations, at her
refusal to marry me, at the fact that even when at last she returned to
Bedley Corner she seemed to evade me?

That exasperated me and perplexed me beyond measure.

I felt that it was treachery. I thought of every conceivable
explanation, and the most exalted and romantic confidence in her did
not simply alternate, but mingled with the basest misgivings.

And into the tangle of memories comes the figure of Carnaby, coming out
slowly from the background to a position of significance, as an
influence, as a predominant strand in the nets that kept us apart, as a
rival. What were the forces that pulled her away from me when it was so
clearly manifest she loved me? Did she think of marrying him? Had I
invaded some long-planned scheme? It was evident he did not like me,
that in some way I spoilt the world for him. She returned to Bedley
Corner, and for some weeks she was flitting about me, and never once
could I have talk with her alone. When she came to my sheds Carnaby was
always with her, jealously observant. (Why the devil couldn’t she send
him about his business?) The days slipped by and my anger gathered.

All this mingles with the making of Lord Roberts β. I had resolved upon
that one night as I lay awake at Bedley Corner; I got it planned out
before the bandages were off my face. I conceived this second navigable
balloon in a grandiose manner. It was to be a second Lord Roberts α,
only more so; it was to be three times as big, large enough to carry
three men, and it was to be an altogether triumphant vindication of my
claims upon the air. The framework was to be hollow like a bird’s
bones, airtight, and the air pumped in or out, and the weight of fuel I
carried changed. I talked much and boasted to Cothope—whom I suspected
of scepticisms about this new type—of what it would do, and it
progressed—slowly. It progressed slowly because I was restless and
uncertain. At times I would go away to London to snatch some chance of
seeing Beatrice there, at times nothing but a day of gliding and hard
and dangerous exercise would satisfy me. And now in the newspapers, in
conversation, in everything about me, arose a new invader of my mental
states. Something was happening to the great schemes of my uncle’s
affairs; people were beginning to doubt, to question. It was the first
quiver of his tremendous insecurity, the first wobble of that gigantic
credit top he had kept spinning so long.

There were comings and goings, November and December slipped by. I had
two unsatisfactory meetings with Beatrice, meetings that had no
privacy—in which we said things of the sort that need atmosphere,
baldly and furtively. I wrote to her several times and she wrote back
notes that I would sometimes respond to altogether, sometimes condemn
as insincere evasions. “You don’t understand. I can’t just now explain.
Be patient with me. Leave things a little while to me.” She wrote.

I would talk aloud to these notes and wrangle over them in my
workroom—while the plans of Lord Roberts β waited.

“You don’t give me a chance!” I would say. “Why don’t you let me know
the secret? That’s what I’m for—to settle difficulties! to tell
difficulties to!”

And at last I could hold out no longer against these accumulating
pressures.

I took an arrogant, outrageous line that left her no loopholes; I
behaved as though we were living in a melodrama.

“You must come and talk to me,” I wrote, “or I will come and take you.
I want you—and the time runs away.”

We met in a ride in the upper plantations. It must have been early in
January, for there was snow on the ground and on the branches of the
trees. We walked to and fro for an hour or more, and from the first I
pitched the key high in romance and made understandings impossible. It
was our worst time together. I boasted like an actor, and she, I know
not why, was tired and spiritless.

Now I think over that talk in the light of all that has happened since,
I can imagine how she came to me full of a human appeal I was too
foolish to let her make. I don’t know. I confess I have never
completely understood Beatrice. I confess I am still perplexed at many
things she said and did. That afternoon, anyhow, I was impossible. I
posed and scolded. I was—I said it—for “taking the Universe by the
throat!”

“If it was only that,” she said, but though I heard, I did not heed
her.

At last she gave way to me and talked no more. Instead she looked at
me—as a thing beyond her controlling, but none the less
interesting—much as she had looked at me from behind the skirts of Lady
Drew in the Warren when we were children together.

Once even I thought she smiled faintly.

“What are the difficulties” I cried, “there’s no difficulty I will not
overcome for you! Do your people think I’m no equal for you? Who says
it? My dear, tell me to win a title! I’ll do it in five years!...

“Here am I just grown a man at the sight of you. I have wanted
something to fight for. Let me fight for you!...

“I’m rich without intending it. Let me mean it, give me an honourable
excuse for it, and I’ll put all this rotten old Warren of England at
your feet!”

I said such things as that. I write them down here in all their
resounding base pride. I said these empty and foolish things, and they
are part of me. Why should I still cling to pride and be ashamed? I
shouted her down.

I passed from such megalomania to petty accusations.

“You think Carnaby is a better man than I?” I said.

“No!” she cried, stung to speech. “No!”

“You think we’re unsubstantial. You’ve listened to all these rumours
Boom has started because we talked of a newspaper of our own. When you
are with me you know I’m a man; when you get away from me you think I’m
a cheat and a cad.... There’s not a word of truth in the things they
say about us. I’ve been slack. I’ve left things. But we have only to
exert ourselves. You do not know how wide and far we have spread our
nets. Even now we have a coup—an expedition—in hand. It will put us on
a footing.”...

Her eyes asked mutely and asked in vain that I would cease to boast of
the very qualities she admired in me.

In the night I could not sleep for thinking of that talk and the vulgar
things I had said in it. I could not understand the drift my mind had
taken. I was acutely disgusted. And my unwonted doubts about myself
spread from a merely personal discontent to our financial position. It
was all very well to talk as I had done of wealth and power and
peerages, but what did I know nowadays of my uncle’s position? Suppose
in the midst of such boasting and confidence there came some turn I did
not suspect, some rottenness he had concealed from me? I resolved I had
been playing with aeronautics long enough; that next morning I would go
to him and have things clear between us.

I caught an early train and went up to the Hardingham.

I went up to the Hardingham through a dense London fog to see how
things really stood. Before I had talked to my uncle for ten minutes I
felt like a man who has just awakened in a bleak, inhospitable room out
of a grandiose dream.




CHAPTER THE FOURTH
HOW I STOLE THE HEAPS OF QUAP FROM MORDET ISLAND


I

“We got to make a fight for it,” said my uncle. “We got to face the
music!”

I remember that even at the sight of him I had a sense of impending
calamity. He sat under the electric light with the shadow of his hair
making bars down his face. He looked shrunken, and as though his skin
had suddenly got loose and yellow. The decorations of the room seemed
to have lost freshness, and outside the blinds were up—there was not so
much fog as a dun darkness. One saw the dingy outlines of the chimneys
opposite quite distinctly, and then a sky of such brown as only London
can display.

“I saw a placard,” I said: “‘More Ponderevity.’”

“That’s Boom,” he said. “Boom and his damned newspapers. He’s trying to
fight me down. Ever since I offered to buy the _Daily Decorator_ he’s
been at me. And he thinks consolidating Do Ut cut down the ads. He
wants everything, damn him! He’s got no sense of dealing. I’d like to
bash his face!”

“Well,” I said, “what’s to be done?”

“Keep going,” said my uncle.

“I’ll smash Boom yet,” he said, with sudden savagery.

“Nothing else?” I asked.

“We got to keep going. There’s a scare on. Did you notice the rooms?
Half the people out there this morning are reporters. And if I talk
they touch it up!... They didn’t used to touch things up! Now they put
in character touches—insulting you. Don’t know what journalism’s coming
to. It’s all Boom’s doing.”

He cursed Lord Boom with considerable imaginative vigour.

“Well,” said I, “what can he do?”

“Shove us up against time, George; make money tight for us. We been
handling a lot of money—and he tightens us up.”

“We’re sound?”

“Oh, we’re sound, George. Trust me for that! But all the same—There’s
such a lot of imagination in these things.... We’re sound enough.
That’s not it.”

He blew. “Damn Boom!” he said, and his eyes over his glasses met mine
defiantly.

“We can’t, I suppose, run close hauled for a bitstop expenditure?”

“Where?”

“Well,—Crest Hill”

“What!” he shouted. “Me stop Crest Hill for Boom!” He waved a fist as
if to hit his inkpot, and controlled himself with difficulty. He spoke
at last in a reasonable voice. “If I did,” he said, “he’d kick up a
fuss. It’s no good, even if I wanted to. Everybody’s watching the
place. If I was to stop building we’d be down in a week.”

He had an idea. “I wish I could do something to start a strike or
something. No such luck. Treat those workmen a sight too well. No, sink
or swim, Crest Hill goes on until we’re under water.”

I began to ask questions and irritated him instantly.

“Oh, dash these explanations, George!” he cried; “You only make things
look rottener than they are. It’s your way. It isn’t a case of figures.
We’re all right—there’s only one thing we got to do.”

“Yes?”

“Show value, George. That’s where this quap comes in; that’s why I fell
in so readily with what you brought to me week before last. Here we
are, we got our option on the perfect filament, and all we want’s
canadium. Nobody knows there’s more canadium in the world than will go
on the edge of a sixpence except me and you. Nobody has an idee the
perfect filament’s more than just a bit of theorising. Fifty tons of
quap and we’d turn that bit of theorising into something. We’d make the
lamp trade sit on its tail and howl. We’d put Ediswan and all of ’em
into a parcel without last year’s trousers and a hat, and swap ’em off
for a pot of geraniums. See? We’d do it through Business Organisations,
and there you are! See? Capern’s Patent Filament!

“The Ideal and the Real! George, we’ll do it! We’ll bring it off! And
then we’ll give such a facer to Boom, he’ll think for fifty years. He’s
laying up for our London and African meeting. Let him. He can turn the
whole paper on to us. He says the Business Organisations shares aren’t
worth fifty-two and we quote ’em at eighty-four. Well, here we are
gettin’ ready for him—loading our gun.”

His pose was triumphant.

“Yes,” I said, “that’s all right. But I can’t help thinking where
should we be if we hadn’t just by accident got Capern’s Perfect
Filament. Because, you know it was an accident—my buying up that.”

He crumpled up his nose into an expression of impatient distaste at my
unreasonableness.

“And after all, the meeting’s in June, and you haven’t begun to get the
quap! After all, we’ve still got to load our gun.”

“They start on Toosday.”

“Have they got the brig?”

“They’ve got a brig.”

“Gordon-Nasmyth!” I doubted.

“Safe as a bank,” he said. “More I see of that man the more I like him.
All I wish is we’d got a steamer instead of a sailing ship.”

“And,” I went on, “you seem to overlook what used to weigh with us a
bit. This canadium side of the business and the Capern chance has
rushed you off your legs. After all—it’s stealing, and in its way an
international outrage. They’ve got two gunboats on the coast.”

I jumped up and went and stared out at the fog.

“And, by Jove, it’s about our only chance! I didn’t dream.”

I turned on him. “I’ve been up in the air,” I said.

“Heaven knows where I haven’t been. And here’s our only chance—and you
give it to that adventurous lunatic to play in his own way—in a brig!”

“Well, you had a voice—”

“I wish I’d been in this before. We ought to have run out a steamer to
Lagos or one of those West Coast places and done it from there. Fancy a
brig in the channel at this time of year, if it blows southwest!”

“I dessay you’d have shoved it, George. Still you know, George.... I
believe in him.”

“Yes,” I said. “Yes, I believe in him, too. In a way. Still—”

We took up a telegram that was lying on his desk and opened it. His
face became a livid yellow. He put the flimsy paper down with a slow,
reluctant movement and took off his glasses.

“George,” he said, “the luck’s against us.”

“What?”

He grimaced with his mouth—in the queerest way at the telegram.

“That.”

I took it up and read:

“Motor smash compound fracture of the leg gordon nasmyth what price
mordet now”

For a moment neither of us spoke.

“That’s all right,” I said at last.

“Eh?” said my uncle.

“_I’m_ going. I’ll get that quap or bust.”

II

I had a ridiculous persuasion that I was “saving the situation.”

“I’m going,” I said quite consciously and dramatically. I saw the whole
affair—how shall I put it?—in American colours.

I sat down beside him. “Give me all the data you’ve got,” I said, “and
I’ll pull this thing off.”

“But nobody knows exactly where—”

“Nasmyth does, and he’ll tell me.”

“He’s been very close,” said my uncle, and regarded me.

“He’ll tell me all right, now he’s smashed.”

He thought. “I believe he will.”

“George,” he said, “if you pull this thing off—Once or twice before
you’ve stepped in—with that sort of Woosh of yours—”

He left the sentence unfinished.

“Give me that note-book,” I said, “and tell me all you know. Where’s
the ship? Where’s Pollack? And where’s that telegram from? If that
quap’s to be got, I’ll get it or bust. If you’ll hold on here until I
get back with it.”...

And so it was I jumped into the wildest adventure of my life.

I requisitioned my uncle’s best car forthwith. I went down that night
to the place of despatch named on Nasmyth’s telegram, Bampton S.O.
Oxon, routed him out with a little trouble from that centre, made
things right with him and got his explicit directions; and I was
inspecting the _Maud Mary_ with young Pollack, his cousin and aide, the
following afternoon. She was rather a shock to me and not at all in my
style, a beast of a brig inured to the potato trade, and she reeked
from end to end with the faint, subtle smell of raw potatoes so that it
prevailed even over the temporary smell of new paint. She was a beast
of a brig, all hold and dirty framework, and they had ballasted her
with old iron and old rails and iron sleepers, and got a miscellaneous
lot of spades and iron wheelbarrows against the loading of the quap. I
thought her over with Pollack, one of those tall blond young men who
smoke pipes and don’t help much, and then by myself, and as a result I
did my best to sweep Gravesend clean of wheeling planks, and got in as
much cord and small rope as I could for lashing. I had an idea we might
need to run up a jetty. In addition to much ballast she held, remotely
hidden in a sort of inadvertent way a certain number of ambiguous cases
which I didn’t examine, but which I gathered were a provision against
the need of a trade.

The captain was a most extraordinary creature, under the impression we
were after copper ore; he was a Roumanian Jew, with twitching,
excitable features, who had made his way to a certificate after some
preliminary naval experiences in the Black Sea. The mate was an Essex
man of impenetrable reserve. The crew were astoundingly ill-clad and
destitute and dirty; most of them youths, unwashed, out of colliers.
One, the cook was a mulatto; and one, the best-built fellow of them
all, was a Breton. There was some subterfuge about our position on
board—I forget the particulars now—I was called the supercargo and
Pollack was the steward. This added to the piratical flavour that
insufficient funds and Gordon-Nasmyth’s original genius had already
given the enterprise.

Those two days of bustle at Gravesend, under dingy skies, in narrow,
dirty streets, were a new experience for me. It is like nothing else in
my life. I realised that I was a modern and a civilised man. I found
the food filthy and the coffee horrible; the whole town stank in my
nostrils, the landlord of the Good Intent on the quay had a stand-up
quarrel with us before I could get even a hot bath, and the bedroom I
slept in was infested by a quantity of exotic but voracious flat
parasites called locally “bugs,” in the walls, in the woodwork,
everywhere. I fought them with insect powder, and found them comatose
in the morning. I was dipping down into the dingy underworld of the
contemporary state, and I liked it no better than I did my first dip
into it when I stayed with my Uncle Nicodemus Frapp at the bakery at
Chatham—where, by-the-by, we had to deal with cockroaches of a smaller,
darker variety, and also with bugs of sorts.

Let me confess that through all this time before we started I was
immensely self-conscious, and that Beatrice played the part of audience
in my imagination throughout. I was, as I say, “saving the situation,”
and I was acutely aware of that. The evening before we sailed, instead
of revising our medicine-chest as I had intended, I took the car and
ran across country to Lady Grove to tell my aunt of the journey I was
making, dress, and astonish Lady Osprey by an after dinner call.

The two ladies were at home and alone beside a big fire that seemed
wonderfully cheerful after the winter night. I remember the effect of
the little parlour in which they sat as very bright and domestic. Lady
Osprey, in a costume of mauve and lace, sat on a chintz sofa and played
an elaborately spread-out patience by the light of a tall shaded lamp;
Beatrice, in a whiteness that showed her throat, smoked a cigarette in
an armchair and read with a lamp at her elbow. The room was
white-panelled and chintz-curtained. About those two bright centres of
light were warm dark shadow, in which a circular mirror shone like a
pool of brown water. I carried off my raid by behaving like a slave of
etiquette. There were moments when I think I really made Lady Osprey
believe that my call was an unavoidable necessity, that it would have
been negligent of me not to call just how and when I did. But at the
best those were transitory moments.

They received me with disciplined amazement. Lady Osprey was interested
in my face and scrutinised the scar. Beatrice stood behind her
solicitude. Our eyes met, and in hers I could see startled
interrogations.

“I’m going,” I said, “to the west coast of Africa.”

They asked questions, but it suited my mood to be vague.

“We’ve interests there. It is urgent I should go. I don’t know when I
may return.”

After that I perceived Beatrice surveyed me steadily.

The conversation was rather difficult. I embarked upon lengthy thanks
for their kindness to me after my accident. I tried to understand Lady
Osprey’s game of patience, but it didn’t appear that Lady Osprey was
anxious for me to understand her patience. I came to the verge of
taking my leave.

“You needn’t go yet,” said Beatrice, abruptly.

She walked across to the piano, took a pile of music from the cabinet
near, surveyed Lady Osprey’s back, and with a gesture to me dropped it
all deliberately on to the floor.

“Must talk,” she said, kneeling close to me as I helped her to pick it
up. “Turn my pages. At the piano.”

“I can’t read music.”

“Turn my pages.”

Presently we were at the piano, and Beatrice was playing with noisy
inaccuracy. She glanced over her shoulder and Lady Osprey had resumed
her patience. The old lady was very pink, and appeared to be absorbed
in some attempt to cheat herself without our observing it.

“Isn’t West Africa a vile climate?” “Are you going to live there?” “Why
are you going?”

Beatrice asked these questions in a low voice and gave me no chance to
answer. Then taking a rhythm from the music before her, she said—

“At the back of the house is a garden—a door in the wall—on the lane.
Understand?”

I turned over the pages without any effect on her playing.

“When?” I asked.

She dealt in chords. “I wish I _could_ play this!” she said.
“Midnight.”

She gave her attention to the music for a time.

“You may have to wait.”

“I’ll wait.”

She brought her playing to an end by—as school boys say—“stashing it
up.”

“I can’t play to-night,” she said, standing up and meeting my eyes. “I
wanted to give you a parting voluntary.”

“Was that Wagner, Beatrice?” asked Lady Osprey looking up from her
cards. “It sounded very confused.”

I took my leave. I had a curious twinge of conscience as I parted from
Lady Osprey. Either a first intimation of middle-age or my inexperience
in romantic affairs was to blame, but I felt a very distinct objection
to the prospect of invading this good lady’s premises from the garden
door. I motored up to the pavilion, found Cothope reading in bed, told
him for the first time of West Africa, spent an hour with him in
settling all the outstanding details of Lord Roberts β, and left that
in his hands to finish against my return. I sent the motor back to Lady
Grove, and still wearing my fur coat—for the January night was damp and
bitterly cold—walked to Bedley Corner. I found the lane to the back of
the Dower House without any difficulty, and was at the door in the wall
with ten minutes to spare. I lit a cigar and fell to walking up and
down. This queer flavour of intrigue, this nocturnal garden-door
business, had taken me by surprise and changed my mental altitudes. I
was startled out of my egotistical pose and thinking intently of
Beatrice, of that elfin quality in her that always pleased me, that
always took me by surprise, that had made her for example so instantly
conceive this meeting.

She came within a minute of midnight; the door opened softly and she
appeared, a short, grey figure in a motor-coat of sheepskin, bareheaded
to the cold drizzle. She flitted up to me, and her eyes were shadows in
her dusky face.

“Why are you going to West Africa?” she asked at once.

“Business crisis. I have to go.”

“You’re not going—? You’re coming back?”

“Three or four months,” I said, “at most.”

“Then, it’s nothing to do with me?”

“Nothing,” I said. “Why should it have?”

“Oh, that’s all right. One never knows what people think or what people
fancy.” She took me by the arm, “Let’s go for a walk,” she said.

I looked about me at darkness and rain.

“That’s all right,” she laughed. “We can go along the lane and into the
Old Woking Road. Do you mind? Of course you don’t. My head. It doesn’t
matter. One never meets anybody.”

“How do you know?”

“I’ve wandered like this before.... Of course. Did you think”—she
nodded her head back at her home—“that’s all?”

“No, by Jove!” I cried; “it’s manifest it isn’t.”

She took my arm and turned me down the lane. “Night’s my time,” she
said by my side. “There’s a touch of the werewolf in my blood. One
never knows in these old families.... I’ve wondered often.... Here we
are, anyhow, alone in the world. Just darkness and cold and a sky of
clouds and wet. And we—together.

“I like the wet on my face and hair, don’t you? When do you sail?”

I told her to-morrow.

“Oh, well, there’s no to-morrow now. You and I!” She stopped and
confronted me.

“You don’t say a word except to answer!”

“No,” I said.

“Last time you did all the talking.”

“Like a fool. Now—”

We looked at each other’s two dim faces. “You’re glad to be here?”

“I’m glad—I’m beginning to be—it’s more than glad.”

She put her hands on my shoulders and drew me down to kiss her.

“Ah!” she said, and for a moment or so we just clung to one another.

“That’s all,” she said, releasing herself. “What bundles of clothes we
are to-night. I felt we should kiss some day again. Always. The last
time was ages ago.”

“Among the fern stalks.”

“Among the bracken. You remember. And your lips were cold. Were mine?
The same lips—after so long—after so much!... And now let’s trudge
through this blotted-out world together for a time. Yes, let me take
your arm. Just trudge. See? Hold tight to me because I know the way—and
don’t talk—don’t talk. Unless you want to talk.... Let me tell you
things! You see, dear, the whole world is blotted out—it’s dead and
gone, and we’re in this place. This dark wild place.... We’re dead. Or
all the world is dead. No! We’re dead. No one can see us. We’re
shadows. We’ve got out of our positions, out of our bodies—and
together. That’s the good thing of it—together. But that’s why the
world can’t see us and why we hardly see the world. Sssh! Is it all
right?”

“It’s all right,” I said.

We stumbled along for a time in a close silence. We passed a dim-lit,
rain-veiled window.

“The silly world,” she said, “the silly world! It eats and sleeps. If
the wet didn’t patter so from the trees we’d hear it snoring. It’s
dreaming such stupid things—stupid judgments. It doesn’t know we are
passing, we two—free of it—clear of it. You and I!”

We pressed against each other reassuringly.

“I’m glad we’re dead,” she whispered. “I’m glad we’re dead. I was tired
of it, dear. I was so tired of it, dear, and so entangled.”

She stopped abruptly.

We splashed through a string of puddles. I began to remember things I
had meant to say.

“Look here!” I cried. “I want to help you beyond measure. You are
entangled. What is the trouble? I asked you to marry me. You said you
would. But there’s something.”

My thoughts sounded clumsy as I said them.

“Is it something about my position?... Or is it something—perhaps—about
some other man?”

There was an immense assenting silence.

“You’ve puzzled me so. At first—I mean quite early—I thought you meant
to make me marry you.”

“I did.”

“And then?”

“To-night,” she said after a long pause, “I can’t explain. No! I can’t
explain. I love you! But—explanations! To-night my dear, here we are in
the world alone—and the world doesn’t matter. Nothing matters. Here I
am in the cold with you and my bed away there deserted. I’d tell you—I
_will_ tell you when things enable me to tell you, and soon enough they
will. But to-night—I won’t—I won’t.”

She left my side and went in front of me.

She turned upon me. “Look here,” she said, “I insist upon your being
dead. Do you understand? I’m not joking. To-night you and I are out of
life. It’s our time together. There may be other times, but this we
won’t spoil. We’re—in Hades if you like. Where there’s nothing to hide
and nothing to tell. No bodies even. No bothers. We loved each
other—down there—and were kept apart, but now it doesn’t matter. It’s
over.... If you won’t agree to that—I will go home.”

“I wanted,” I began.

“I know. Oh! my dear, if you’d only understand I understand. If you’d
only not care—and love me to-night.”

“I do love you,” I said.

“Then _love_ me,” she answered, “and leave all the things that bother
you. Love me! Here I am!”

“But!—”

“No!” she said.

“Well, have your way.”

So she carried her point, and we wandered into the night together and
Beatrice talked to me of love....

I’d never heard a woman before in all my life who could talk of love,
who could lay bare and develop and touch with imagination all that mass
of fine emotion every woman, it may be, hides. She had read of love,
she had thought of love, a thousand sweet lyrics had sounded through
her brain and left fine fragments in her memory; she poured it out, all
of it, shamelessly, skilfully, for me. I cannot give any sense of that
talk, I cannot even tell how much of the delight of it was the magic of
her voice, the glow of her near presence. And always we walked swathed
warmly through a chilly air, along dim, interminable greasy roads—with
never a soul abroad it seemed to us, never a beast in the fields.

“Why do people love each other?” I said.

“Why not?”

“But why do I love you? Why is your voice better than any voice, your
face sweeter than any face?”

“And why do I love you?” she asked; “not only what is fine in you, but
what isn’t? Why do I love your dullness, your arrogance? For I do.
To—night I love the very raindrops on the fur of your coat!”...

So we talked; and at last very wet, still glowing but a little tired,
we parted at the garden door. We had been wandering for two hours in
our strange irrational community of happiness, and all the world about
us, and particularly Lady Osprey and her household, had been asleep—and
dreaming of anything rather than Beatrice in the night and rain.

She stood in the doorway, a muffled figure with eyes that glowed.

“Come back,” she whispered. “I shall wait for you.”

She hesitated.

She touched the lapel of my coat. “I love you NOW,” she said, and
lifted her face to mine.

I held her to me and was atremble from top to toe. “O God!” I cried.
“And I must go!”

She slipped from my arms and paused, regarding me. For an instant the
world seemed full of fantastic possibilities.

“Yes, _Go!_” she said, and vanished and slammed the door upon me,
leaving me alone like a man new fallen from fairyland in the black
darkness of the night.

III

That expedition to Mordet Island stands apart from all the rest of my
life, detached, a piece by itself with an atmosphere of its own. It
would, I suppose, make a book by itself—it has made a fairly voluminous
official report—but so far as this novel of mine goes it is merely an
episode, a contributory experience, and I mean to keep it at that.

Vile weather, an impatient fretting against unbearable slowness and
delay, sea—sickness, general discomfort and humiliating self—revelation
are the master values of these memories.

I was sick all through the journey out. I don’t know why. It was the
only time I was ever sea-sick, and I have seen some pretty bad weather
since I became a boat-builder. But that phantom smell of potatoes was
peculiarly vile to me. Coming back on the brig we were all ill, every
one of us, so soon as we got to sea, poisoned, I firmly believe, by
quap. On the way out most of the others recovered in a few days, but
the stuffiness below, the coarse food, the cramped dirty accommodation
kept me, if not actually sea-sick, in a state of acute physical
wretchedness the whole time. The ship abounded in cockroaches and more
intimate vermin. I was cold all the time until after we passed Cape
Verde, then I became steamily hot; I had been too preoccupied with
Beatrice and my keen desire to get the _Maud Mary_ under way at once,
to consider a proper wardrobe for myself, and in particular I lacked a
coat. Heavens! how I lacked that coat! And, moreover, I was cooped up
with two of the worst bores in Christendom, Pollack and the captain.
Pollack, after conducting his illness in a style better adapted to the
capacity of an opera house than a small compartment, suddenly got
insupportably well and breezy, and produced a manly pipe in which he
smoked a tobacco as blond as himself, and divided his time almost
equally between smoking it and trying to clean it. “There’s only three
things you can clean a pipe with,” he used to remark with a twist of
paper in hand. “The best’s a feather, the second’s a straw, and the
third’s a girl’s hairpin. I never see such a ship. You can’t find any
of ’em. Last time I came this way I did find hairpins anyway, and found
’em on the floor of the captain’s cabin. Regular deposit. Eh?...
Feelin’ better?”

At which I usually swore.

“Oh, you’ll be all right soon. Don’t mind my puffin’ a bit? Eh?”

He never tired of asking me to “have a hand at Nap. Good game. Makes
you forget it, and that’s half the battle.”

He would sit swaying with the rolling of the ship and suck at his pipe
of blond tobacco and look with an inexpressibly sage but somnolent blue
eye at the captain by the hour together. “Captain’s a Card,” he would
say over and over again as the outcome of these meditations. “He’d like
to know what we’re up to. He’d like to know—no end.”

That did seem to be the captain’s ruling idea. But he also wanted to
impress me with the notion that he was a gentleman of good family and
to air a number of views adverse to the English, to English literature,
to the English constitution, and the like.

He had learnt the sea in the Roumanian navy, and English out of a book;
he would still at times pronounce the e’s at the end of “there” and
“here”; he was a naturalised Englishman, and he drove me into a
reluctant and uncongenial patriotism by his everlasting carping at
things English. Pollack would set himself to “draw him out.” Heaven
alone can tell how near I came to murder.

Fifty-three days I had outward, cooped up with these two and a shy and
profoundly depressed mate who read the Bible on Sundays and spent the
rest of his leisure in lethargy, three and fifty days of life cooped up
in a perpetual smell, in a persistent sick hunger that turned from the
sight of food, in darkness, cold and wet, in a lightly ballasted ship
that rolled and pitched and swayed. And all the time the sands in the
hour-glass of my uncle’s fortunes were streaming out. Misery! Amidst it
all I remember only one thing brightly, one morning of sunshine in the
Bay of Biscay and a vision of frothing waves, sapphire green, a bird
following our wake and our masts rolling about the sky. Then wind and
rain close in on us again.

You must not imagine they were ordinary days, days, I mean, of an
average length; they were not so much days as long damp slabs of time
that stretched each one to the horizon, and much of that length was
night. One paraded the staggering deck in a borrowed sou’-wester hour
after hour in the chilly, windy, splashing and spitting darkness, or
sat in the cabin, bored and ill, and looked at the faces of those
inseparable companions by the help of a lamp that gave smell rather
than light. Then one would see going up, up, up, and then sinking down,
down, down, Pollack, extinct pipe in mouth, humorously observant,
bringing his mind slowly to the seventy-seventh decision that the
captain was a Card, while the words flowed from the latter in a nimble
incessant good. “Dis England eet is not a country aristocratic, no! Eet
is a glorified bourgeoisie! Eet is plutocratic. In England dere is no
aristocracy since de Wars of Roses. In the rest of Europe east of the
Latins, yes; in England, no.

“Eet is all middle-class, youra England. Everything you look at,
middle-class. Respectable! Everything good—eet is, you say, shocking.
Madame Grundy! Eet is all limited and computing and self-seeking. Dat
is why your art is so limited, youra fiction, your philosophin, why you
are all so inartistic. You want nothing but profit! What will pay! What
would you?”...

He had all those violent adjuncts to speech we Western Europeans have
abandoned, shruggings of the shoulders, waving of the arms, thrusting
out of the face, wonderful grimaces and twiddlings of the hands under
your nose until you wanted to hit them away. Day after day it went on,
and I had to keep any anger to myself, to reserve myself for the time
ahead when it would be necessary to see the quap was got aboard and
stowed—knee deep in this man’s astonishment. I knew he would make a
thousand objections to all we had before us. He talked like a drugged
man. It ran glibly over his tongue. And all the time one could see his
seamanship fretting him, he was gnawed by responsibility, perpetually
uneasy about the ship’s position, perpetually imagining dangers. If a
sea hit us exceptionally hard he’d be out of the cabin in an instant
making an outcry of inquiries, and he was pursued by a dread of the
hold, of ballast shifting, of insidious wicked leaks. As we drew near
the African coast his fear of rocks and shoals became infectious.

“I do not know dis coast,” he used to say. “I cama hera because
Gordon-Nasmyth was coming too. Den he does not come!”

“Fortunes of war,” I said, and tried to think in vain if any motive but
sheer haphazard could have guided Gordon-Nasmyth in the choice of these
two men. I think perhaps Gordon-Nasmyth had the artistic temperament
and wanted contrasts, and also that the captain helped him to express
his own malignant Anti-Britishism.

He was indeed an exceptionally inefficient captain. On the whole I was
glad I had come even at the eleventh hour to see to things.

(The captain, by-the-by, did at last, out of sheer nervousness, get
aground at the end of Mordet’s Island, but we got off in an hour or so
with a swell and a little hard work in the boat.)

I suspected the mate of his opinion of the captain long before he
expressed it. He was, I say, a taciturn man, but one day speech broke
through him. He had been sitting at the table with his arms folded on
it, musing drearily, pipe in mouth, and the voice of the captain
drifted down from above.

The mate lifted his heavy eyes to me and regarded me for a moment. Then
he began to heave with the beginnings of speech. He disembarrassed
himself of his pipe. I cowered with expectation. Speech was coming at
last. Before he spoke he nodded reassuringly once or twice.

“E—”

He moved his head strangely and mysteriously, but a child might have
known he spoke of the captain.

“E’s a foreigner.”

He regarded me doubtfully for a time, and at last decided for the sake
of lucidity to clench the matter.

“That’s what E is—a _Dago!_”

He nodded like a man who gives a last tap to a nail, and I could see he
considered his remark well and truly laid. His face, though still
resolute, became as tranquil and uneventful as a huge hall after a
public meeting has dispersed out of it, and finally he closed and
locked it with his pipe.

“Roumanian Jew, isn’t he?” I said.

He nodded darkly and almost forbiddingly.

More would have been too much. The thing was said. But from that time
forth I knew I could depend upon him and that he and I were friends. It
happens I never did have to depend upon him, but that does not affect
our relationship.

Forward the crew lived lives very much after the fashion of ours, more
crowded, more cramped and dirty, wetter, steamier, more verminous. The
coarse food they had was still not so coarse but that they did not
think they were living “like fighting cocks.” So far as I could make
out they were all nearly destitute men; hardly any of them had a proper
sea outfit, and what small possessions they had were a source of mutual
distrust. And as we pitched and floundered southward they gambled and
fought, were brutal to one another, argued and wrangled loudly, until
we protested at the uproar.

There’s no romance about the sea in a small sailing ship as I saw it.
The romance is in the mind of the landsman dreamer. These brigs and
schooners and brigantines that still stand out from every little port
are relics from an age of petty trade, as rotten and obsolescent as a
Georgian house that has sunken into a slum. They are indeed just
floating fragments of slum, much as icebergs are floating fragments of
glacier. The civilised man who has learnt to wash, who has developed a
sense of physical honour, of cleanly temperate feeding, of time, can
endure them no more. They pass, and the clanking coal-wasting steamers
will follow them, giving place to cleaner, finer things....

But so it was I made my voyage to Africa, and came at last into a world
of steamy fogs and a hot smell of vegetable decay, and into sound and
sight of surf and distant intermittent glimpses of the coast. I lived a
strange concentrated life through all that time, such a life as a
creature must do that has fallen in a well. All my former ways ceased,
all my old vistas became memories.

The situation I was saving was very small and distant now; I felt its
urgency no more. Beatrice and Lady Grove, my uncle and the Hardingham,
my soaring in the air and my habitual wide vision of swift effectual
things, became as remote as if they were in some world I had left for
ever....

IV

All these African memories stand by themselves. It was for me an
expedition into the realms of undisciplined nature out of the world
that is ruled by men, my first bout with that hot side of our mother
that gives you the jungle—that cold side that gives you the air-eddy I
was beginning to know passing well. They are memories woven upon a
fabric of sunshine and heat and a constant warm smell of decay. They
end in rain—such rain as I had never seen before, a vehement, a frantic
downpouring of water, but our first slow passage through the channels
behind Mordet’s Island was in incandescent sunshine.

There we go in my memory still, a blistered dirty ship with patched
sails and a battered mermaid to present _Maud Mary_, sounding and
taking thought between high ranks of forest whose trees come out
knee-deep at last in the water. There we go with a little breeze on our
quarter, Mordet Island rounded and the quap, it might be within a day
of us.

Here and there strange blossoms woke the dank intensities of green with
a trumpet call of colour. Things crept among the jungle and peeped and
dashed back rustling into stillness. Always in the sluggishly drifting,
opaque water were eddyings and stirrings; little rushes of bubbles came
chuckling up light-heartedly from this or that submerged conflict and
tragedy; now and again were crocodiles like a stranded fleet of logs
basking in the sun. Still it was by day, a dreary stillness broken only
by insect sounds and the creaking and flapping of our progress, by the
calling of the soundings and the captain’s confused shouts; but in the
night as we lay moored to a clump of trees the darkness brought a
thousand swampy things to life and out of the forest came screaming and
howlings, screaming and yells that made us glad to be afloat. And once
we saw between the tree stems long blazing fires. We passed two or
three villages landward, and brown-black women and children came and
stared at us and gesticulated, and once a man came out in a boat from a
creek and hailed us in an unknown tongue; and so at last we came to a
great open place, a broad lake rimmed with a desolation of mud and
bleached refuse and dead trees, free from crocodiles or water birds or
sight or sound of any living thing, and saw far off, even as Nasmyth
had described, the ruins of the deserted station, and hard by two
little heaps of buff-hued rubbish under a great rib of rock, the quap!
The forest receded. The land to the right of us fell away and became
barren, and far on across notch in its backbone was surf and the sea.

We took the ship in towards those heaps and the ruined jetty slowly and
carefully. The captain came and talked.

“This is eet?” he said.

