“No,” said I.

“Gordon-Nasmyth would haf told me long ago what it ees for we haf
come.”

“I’ll tell you now,” I said. “We are going to lay in as close as we can
to those two heaps of stuff—you see them?—under the rock. Then we are
going to chuck all our ballast overboard and take those in. Then we’re
going home.”

“May I presume to ask—is eet gold?”

“No,” I said incivilly, “it isn’t.”

“Then what is it?”

“It’s stuff—of some commercial value.”

“We can’t do eet,” he said.

“We can,” I answered reassuringly.

“We can’t,” he said as confidently. “I don’t mean what you mean. You
know so liddle—But—dis is forbidden country.”

I turned on him suddenly angry and met bright excited eyes. For a
minute we scrutinised one another. Then I said, “That’s our risk. Trade
is forbidden. But this isn’t trade.... This thing’s got to be done.”

His eyes glittered and he shook his head....

The brig stood in slowly through the twilight toward this strange
scorched and blistered stretch of beach, and the man at the wheel
strained his ears to listening the low-voiced angry argument that began
between myself and the captain, that was presently joined by Pollack.
We moored at last within a hundred yards of our goal, and all through
our dinner and far into the night we argued intermittently and fiercely
with the captain about our right to load just what we pleased. “I will
haf nothing to do with eet,” he persisted. “I wash my hands.” It seemed
that night as though we argued in vain. “If it is not trade,” he said,
“it is prospecting and mining. That is worse. Any one who knows
anything—outside England—knows that is worse.”

We argued and I lost my temper and swore at him. Pollack kept cooler
and chewed his pipe watchfully with that blue eye of his upon the
captain’s gestures. Finally I went on deck to cool. The sky was
overcast I discovered all the men were in a knot forward, staring at
the faint quivering luminosity that had spread over the heaps of quap,
a phosphorescence such as one sees at times on rotting wood. And about
the beach east and west there were patches and streaks of something
like diluted moonshine....

In the small hours I was still awake and turning over scheme after
scheme in my mind whereby I might circumvent the captain’s opposition.
I meant to get that quap aboard if I had to kill some one to do it.
Never in my life had I been so thwarted! After this intolerable voyage!
There came a rap at my cabin door and then it opened and I made out a
bearded face. “Come in,” I said, and a black voluble figure I could
just see obscurely came in to talk in my private ear and fill my cabin
with its whisperings and gestures. It was the captain. He, too, had
been awake and thinking things over. He had come to explain—enormously.
I lay there hating him and wondering if I and Pollack could lock him in
his cabin and run the ship without him. “I do not want to spoil dis
expedition,” emerged from a cloud of protestations, and then I was able
to disentangle “a commission—shush a small commission—for special
risks!” “Special risks” became frequent. I let him explain himself out.
It appeared he was also demanding an apology for something I had said.
No doubt I had insulted him generously. At last came definite offers. I
broke my silence and bargained.

“Pollack!” I cried and hammered the partition.

“What’s up?” asked Pollack.

I stated the case concisely.

There came a silence.

“He’s a Card,” said Pollack. “Let’s give him his commission. I don’t
mind.”

“Eh?” I cried.

“I said he was a Card, that’s all,” said Pollack. “I’m coming.”

He appeared in my doorway a faint white figure joined our vehement
whisperings.

We had to buy the captain off; we had to promise him ten per cent. of
our problematical profits. We were to give him ten per cent. on what we
sold the cargo for over and above his legitimate pay, and I found in my
out-bargained and disordered state small consolation in the thought
that I, as the Gordon-Nasmyth expedition, was to sell the stuff to
myself as Business Organisations. And he further exasperated me by
insisting on having our bargain in writing. “In the form of a letter,”
he insisted.

“All right,” I acquiesced, “in the form of a letter. Here goes! Get a
light!”

“And the apology,” he said, folding up the letter.

“All right,” I said; “Apology.”

My hand shook with anger as I wrote, and afterwards I could not sleep
for hate of him. At last I got up. I suffered, I found, from an unusual
clumsiness. I struck my toe against my cabin door, and cut myself as I
shaved. I found myself at last pacing the deck under the dawn in a mood
of extreme exasperation. The sun rose abruptly and splashed light
blindingly into my eyes and I swore at the sun. I found myself
imagining fresh obstacles with the men and talking aloud in
anticipatory rehearsal of the consequent row.

The malaria of the quap was already in my blood.

V

Sooner or later the ridiculous embargo that now lies upon all the coast
eastward of Mordet Island will be lifted and the reality of the
deposits of quap ascertained. I am sure that we were merely taking the
outcrop of a stratum of nodulated deposits that dip steeply seaward.
Those heaps were merely the crumbled out contents of two irregular
cavities in the rock; they are as natural as any talus or heap of that
kind, and the mud along the edge of the water for miles is mixed with
quap, and is radio-active and lifeless and faintly phosphorescent at
night. But the reader will find the full particulars of my impression
of all this in the _Geological Magazine_ for October, 1905, and to that
I must refer him. There, too, he will find my unconfirmed theories of
its nature. If I am right it is something far more significant from the
scientific point of view than those incidental constituents of various
rare metals, pitchblende, rutile, and the like, upon which the
revolutionary discoveries of the last decade are based. Those are just
little molecular centres of disintegration, of that mysterious decay
and rotting of those elements, elements once regarded as the most
stable things in nature. But there is something—the only word that
comes near it is _cancerous_—and that is not very near, about the whole
of quap, something that creeps and lives as a disease lives by
destroying; an elemental stirring and disarrangement, incalculably
maleficent and strange.

This is no imaginative comparison of mine. To my mind radio-activity is
a real disease of matter. Moreover, it is a contagious disease. It
spreads. You bring those debased and crumbling atoms near others and
those too presently catch the trick of swinging themselves out of
coherent existence. It is in matter exactly what the decay of our old
culture is in society, a loss of traditions and distinctions and
assured reactions. When I think of these inexplicable dissolvent
centres that have come into being in our globe—these quap heaps are
surely by far the largest that have yet been found in the world; the
rest as yet mere specks in grains and crystals—I am haunted by a
grotesque fancy of the ultimate eating away and dry-rotting and
dispersal of all our world. So that while man still struggles and
dreams his very substance will change and crumble from beneath him. I
mention this here as a queer persistent fancy. Suppose, indeed, that is
to be the end of our planet; no splendid climax and finale, no towering
accumulation of achievements, but just—atomic decay! I add that to the
ideas of the suffocating comet, the dark body out of space, the burning
out of the sun, the distorted orbit, as a new and far more possible
end—as Science can see ends—to this strange by-play of matter that we
call human life. I do not believe this can be the end; no human soul
can believe in such an end and go on living, but to it science points
as a possible thing, science and reason alike. If single human
beings—if one single ricketty infant—can be born as it were by accident
and die futile, why not the whole race? These are questions I have
never answered, that now I never attempt to answer, but the thought of
quap and its mysteries brings them back to me.

I can witness that the beach and mud for two miles or more either way
was a lifeless beach—lifeless as I could have imagined no tropical mud
could ever be, and all the dead branches and leaves and rotting dead
fish and so forth that drifted ashore became presently shrivelled and
white. Sometimes crocodiles would come up out of the water and bask,
and now and then water birds would explore the mud and rocky ribs that
rose out of it, in a mood of transitory speculation. That was its
utmost admiration. And the air felt at once hot and austere, dry and
blistering, and altogether different the warm moist embrace that had
met us at our first African landfall and to which we had grown
accustomed.

I believe that the primary influence of the quap upon us was to
increase the conductivity of our nerves, but that is a mere
unjustifiable speculation on my part. At any rate it gave a sort of
east wind effect to life. We all became irritable, clumsy, languid and
disposed to be impatient with our languor. We moored the brig to the
rocks with difficulty, and got aground on mud and decided to stick
there and tow off when we had done—the bottom was as greasy as butter.
Our efforts to fix up planks and sleepers in order to wheel the quap
aboard were as ill-conceived as that sort of work can be—and that sort
of work can at times be very ill-conceived. The captain had a
superstitious fear of his hold: he became wildly gesticulatory and
expository and incompetent at the bare thought of it. His shouts still
echo in my memory, becoming as each crisis approached less and less
like any known tongue.

But I cannot now write the history of those days of blundering and
toil: of how Milton, one of the boys, fell from a plank to the beach,
thirty feet perhaps, with his barrow and broke his arm and I believe a
rib, of how I and Pollack set the limb and nursed him through the fever
that followed, of how one man after another succumbed to a feverish
malaria, and how I—by virtue of my scientific reputation—was obliged to
play the part of doctor and dose them with quinine, and then finding
that worse than nothing, with rum and small doses of Easton’s Syrup, of
which there chanced to be a case of bottles aboard—Heaven and
Gordon-Nasmyth know why. For three long days we lay in misery and never
shipped a barrow-load. Then, when they resumed, the men’s hands broke
out into sores. There were no gloves available; and I tried to get
them, while they shovelled and wheeled, to cover their hands with
stockings or greased rags. They would not do this on account of the
heat and discomfort. This attempt of mine did, however, direct their
attention to the quap as the source of their illness and precipitated
what in the end finished our lading, an informal strike. “We’ve had
enough of this,” they said, and they meant it. They came aft to say as
much. They cowed the captain.

Through all these days the weather was variously vile, first a furnace
heat under a sky of a scowling intensity of blue, then a hot fog that
stuck in one’s throat like wool and turned the men on the planks into
colourless figures of giants, then a wild burst of thunderstorms, mad
elemental uproar and rain. Through it all, against illness, heat,
confusion of mind, one master impetus prevailed with me, to keep the
shipping going, to maintain one motif at least, whatever else arose or
ceased, the chuff of the spades, the squeaking and shriek of the
barrows, the pluppa, pluppa, pluppa, as the men came trotting along the
swinging high planks, and then at last, the dollop, dollop, as the
stuff shot into the hold. “Another barrow-load, thank God! Another
fifteen hundred, or it may be two thousand pounds, for the saving of
Ponderevo!...”

I found out many things about myself and humanity in those weeks of
effort behind Mordet Island. I understand now the heart of the sweater,
of the harsh employer, of the nigger-driver. I had brought these men
into a danger they didn’t understand, I was fiercely resolved to
overcome their opposition and bend and use them for my purpose, and I
hated the men. But I hated all humanity during the time that the quap
was near me.

And my mind was pervaded, too, by a sense of urgency and by the fear
that we should be discovered and our proceedings stopped. I wanted to
get out to sea again—to be beating up northward with our plunder. I was
afraid our masts showed to seaward and might betray us to some curious
passer on the high sea. And one evening near the end I saw a canoe with
three natives far off down the lake; I got field-glasses from the
captain and scrutinised them, and I could see them staring at us. One
man might have been a half-breed and was dressed in white. They watched
us for some time very quietly and then paddled off into some channel in
the forest shadows.

And for three nights running, so that it took a painful grip upon my
inflamed imagination, I dreamt of my uncle’s face, only that it was
ghastly white like a clown’s, and the throat was cut from ear to ear—a
long ochreous cut. “Too late,” he said; “Too late!...”

VI

A day or so after we had got to work upon the quap I found myself so
sleepless and miserable that the ship became unendurable. Just before
the rush of sunrise I borrowed Pollack’s gun, walked down the planks,
clambered over the quap heaps and prowled along the beach. I went
perhaps a mile and a half that day and some distance beyond the ruins
of the old station. I became interested in the desolation about me, and
found when I returned that I was able to sleep for nearly an hour. It
was delightful to have been alone for so long,—no captain, no Pollack,
no one. Accordingly I repeated this expedition the next morning and the
next until it became a custom with me. There was little for me to do
once the digging and wheeling was organised, and so these prowlings of
mine grew longer and longer, and presently I began to take food with
me.

I pushed these walks far beyond the area desolated by the quap. On the
edges of that was first a zone of stunted vegetation, then a sort of
swampy jungle that was difficult to penetrate, and then the beginnings
of the forest, a scene of huge tree stems and tangled creeper ropes and
roots mingled with oozy mud. Here I used to loaf in a state between
botanising and reverie—always very anxious to know what was up above in
the sunlight—and here it was I murdered a man.

It was the most unmeaning and purposeless murder imaginable. Even as I
write down its well-remembered particulars there comes again the sense
of its strangeness, its pointlessness, its incompatibility with any of
the neat and definite theories people hold about life and the meaning
of the world. I did this thing and I want to tell of my doing it, but
why I did it and particularly why I should be held responsible for it I
cannot explain.

That morning I had come upon a track in the forest, and it had occurred
to me as a disagreeable idea that this was a human pathway. I didn’t
want to come upon any human beings. The less our expedition saw of the
African population the better for its prospects. Thus far we had been
singularly free from native pestering. So I turned back and was making
my way over mud and roots and dead fronds and petals scattered from the
green world above when abruptly I saw my victim.

I became aware of him perhaps forty feet off standing quite still and
regarding me.

He wasn’t by any means a pretty figure. He was very black and naked
except for a dirty loin-cloth, his legs were ill-shaped and his toes
spread wide and the upper edge of his cloth and a girdle of string cut
his clumsy abdomen into folds. His forehead was low, his nose very flat
and his lower lip swollen and purplish-red. His hair was short and
fuzzy, and about his neck was a string and a little purse of skin. He
carried a musket, and a powder-flask was stuck in his girdle. It was a
curious confrontation. There opposed to him stood I, a little soiled,
perhaps, but still a rather elaborately civilised human being, born,
bred and trained in a vague tradition. In my hand was an unaccustomed
gun. And each of us was essentially a teeming, vivid brain, tensely
excited by the encounter, quite unaware of the other’s mental content
or what to do with him.

He stepped back a pace or so, stumbled and turned to run.

“Stop,” I cried; “stop, you fool!” and started to run after him,
shouting such things in English. But I was no match for him over the
roots and mud.

I had a preposterous idea. “He mustn’t get away and tell them!”

And with that instantly I brought both feet together, raised my gun,
aimed quite coolly, drew the trigger carefully and shot him neatly in
the back.

I saw, and saw with a leap of pure exaltation, the smash of my bullet
between his shoulder blades. “Got him,” said I, dropping my gun and
down he flopped and died without a groan. “By Jove!” I cried with note
of surprise, “I’ve killed him!” I looked about me and then went forward
cautiously, in a mood between curiosity and astonishment, to look at
this man whose soul I had flung so unceremoniously out of our common
world. I went to him, not as one goes to something one has made or
done, but as one approaches something found.

He was frightfully smashed out in front; he must have died in the
instant. I stooped and raised him by his shoulder and realised that. I
dropped him, and stood about and peered about me through the trees. “My
word!” I said. He was the second dead human being—apart, I mean, from
surgical properties and mummies and common shows of that sort—that I
have ever seen. I stood over him wondering, wondering beyond measure.

A practical idea came into that confusion. Had any one heard the gun?

I reloaded.

After a time I felt securer, and gave my mind again to the dead I had
killed. What must I do?

It occurred to me that perhaps I ought to bury him. At any rate, I
ought to hide him. I reflected coolly, and then put my gun within easy
reach and dragged him by the arm towards a place where the mud seemed
soft, and thrust him in. His powder-flask slipped from his loin-cloth,
and I went back to get it. Then I pressed him down with the butt of my
rifle.

Afterwards this all seemed to me most horrible, but at the time it was
entirely a matter-of-fact transaction. I looked round for any other
visible evidence of his fate, looked round as one does when one packs
one’s portmanteau in an hotel bedroom.

When I got my bearings, and carefully returned towards the ship. I had
the mood of grave concentration of a boy who has lapsed into poaching.
And the business only began to assume proper proportions for me as I
got near the ship, to seem any other kind of thing than the killing of
a bird or rabbit.

In the night, however, it took on enormous and portentous forms. “By
God!” I cried suddenly, starting wide awake; “but it was murder!”

I lay after that wide awake, staring at my memories. In some odd way
these visions mixed up with my dream of in my uncle in his despair. The
black body which saw now damaged and partly buried, but which,
nevertheless, I no longer felt was dead but acutely alive and
perceiving, I mixed up with the ochreous slash under my uncle’s face. I
tried to dismiss this horrible obsession from my mind, but it prevailed
over all my efforts.

The next day was utterly black with my sense of that ugly creature’s
body. I am the least superstitious of men, but it drew me. It drew me
back into those thickets to the very place where I had hidden him.

Some evil and detestable beast had been at him, and he lay disinterred.

Methodically I buried his swollen and mangled carcass again, and
returned to the ship for another night of dreams. Next day for all the
morning I resisted the impulse to go to him, and played nap with
Pollack with my secret gnawing at me, and in the evening started to go
and was near benighted. I never told a soul of them of this thing I had
done.

Next day I went early, and he had gone, and there were human footmarks
and ugly stains round the muddy hole from which he had been dragged.

I returned to the ship, disconcerted and perplexed. That day it was the
men came aft, with blistered hands and faces, and sullen eyes. When
they proclaimed, through Edwards, their spokesman, “We’ve had enough of
