“Why not?” said I.

She looked at me gravely, with extended finger. “Do you really think
that—of me? Haven’t you seen me—all?”

I hesitated.

“Never once have I really meant marrying you,” she insisted. “Never
once. I fell in love with you from the first. But when you seemed a
successful man, I told myself I wouldn’t. I was love-sick for you, and
you were so stupid, I came near it then. But I knew I wasn’t good
enough. What could I have been to you? A woman with bad habits and bad
associations, a woman smirched. And what could I do for you or be to
you? If I wasn’t good enough to be a rich man’s wife, I’m certainly not
good enough to be a poor one’s. Forgive me for talking sense to you
now, but I wanted to tell you this somehow.”

She stopped at my gesture. I sat up, and the canoe rocked with my
movement.

“I don’t care,” I said. “I want to marry you and make you my wife!”

“No,” she said, “don’t spoil things. That is impossible!”

“Impossible!”

“Think! I can’t do my own hair! Do you mean you will get me a maid?”

“Good God!” I cried, disconcerted beyond measure, “won’t you learn to
do your own hair for me? Do you mean to say you can love a man—”

She flung out her hands at me. “Don’t spoil it,” she cried. “I have
given you all I have, I have given you all I can. If I could do it, if
I was good enough to do it, I would. But I am a woman spoilt and
ruined, dear, and you are a ruined man. When we are making love we’re
lovers—but think of the gulf between us in habits and ways of thought,
in will and training, when we are not making love. Think of it—and
don’t think of it! Don’t think of it yet. We have snatched some hours.
We still may have some hours!”

She suddenly knelt forward toward me, with a glowing darkness in her
eyes. “Who cares if it upsets?” she cried. “If you say another word I
will kiss you. And go to the bottom clutching you.

“I’m not afraid of that. I’m not a bit afraid of that. I’ll die with
you. Choose a death, and I’ll die with you—readily. Do listen to me! I
love you. I shall always love you. It’s because I love you that I won’t
go down to become a dirty familiar thing with you amidst the grime.
I’ve given all I can. I’ve had all I can.... Tell me,” and she crept
nearer, “have I been like the dusk to you, like the warm dusk? Is there
magic still? Listen to the ripple of water from your paddle. Look at
the warm evening light in the sky. Who cares if the canoe upsets? Come
nearer to me. Oh, my love! come near! So.”

She drew me to her and our lips met.

III

I asked her to marry me once again.

It was our last morning together, and we had met very early, about
sunrise, knowing that we were to part. No sun shone that day. The sky
was overcast, the morning chilly and lit by a clear, cold, spiritless
light. A heavy dampness in the air verged close on rain. When I think
of that morning, it has always the quality of greying ashes wet with
rain.

Beatrice too had changed. The spring had gone out of her movement; it
came to me, for the first time, that some day she might grow old. She
had become one flesh with the rest of common humanity; the softness had
gone from her voice and manner, the dusky magic of her presence had
gone. I saw these things with perfect clearness, and they made me sorry
for them and for her. But they altered my love not a whit, abated it
nothing. And when we had talked awkwardly for half a dozen sentences, I
came dully to my point.

“And now,” I cried, “will you marry me?”

“No,” she said, “I shall keep to my life here.”

I asked her to marry me in a year’s time. She shook her head.

“This world is a soft world,” I said, “in spite of my present
disasters. I know now how to do things. If I had you to work for—in a
year I could be a prosperous man.”

“No,” she said, “I will put it brutally, I shall go back to Carnaby.”

“But—!” I did not feel angry. I had no sort of jealousy, no wounded
pride, no sense of injury. I had only a sense of grey desolation, of
hopeless cross-purposes.

“Look here,” she said. “I have been awake all night and every night. I
have been thinking of this—every moment when we have not been together.
I’m not answering you on an impulse. I love you. I love you. I’ll say
that over ten thousand times. But here we are—”

“The rest of life together,” I said.

“It wouldn’t be together. Now we are together. Now we have been
together. We are full of memories I do not feel I can ever forget a
single one.”

